
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                             THE 
                                                                   RIGOR 
                                                                                  OF 
                                                              ANGELS


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   1                                                                                                                          2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   2                                                                                                                          2/10/2023   11:36
                  for reference only

                    THE       
                RIGOR  
                      OF    
              ANGELS

             Borges, Heisenberg, Kant, and  
             the Ultimate Nature of Reality

                WILLIAM  
              EGGINTON


           !"#$%&'#  ('')* •  # &+ ,'-)


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   3      2/10/2023   11:36
                                             for reference only


                                        Copyright © 2023 by William Egginton

                          All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Pantheon Books,  
                          a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, and distributed  
                            in Canada by Penguin Random House Canada Limited, Toronto.

                               Pantheon Books and colophon are registered trademarks of  
                                            Penguin Random House LLC.

                                                  CIP data to come

                                              www .pantheonbooks .com

                                  Jacket images: (clockwise, upper le.) Jorge Luis Borges,  
                               Pictorial Press/Alamy; Immanuel Kant, Classic Image/Alamy;  
                                      Werner Heisenberg, ullstein bild/Getty Images
                                              Jacket design by Jack Smyth

                                        Printed in the United States of America
                                                     First Edition
                                                   2 4 6 8 9 7 5 3 1


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   4                                                                     2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                    The nature of the universe, which holds
                    the center still and moves all else around it,
                    begins here as if from its turning- post.
                    And this heaven has no other where than this:
                    the mind of God, in which are kindled both
                    the love that turns it and the force it rains.
                                          — D"#$&, Paradiso (1320)

                Enchanted by its rigor, humanity has forgotten, and 
                continues to forget, that it is the rigor of chess masters, 
                not of angels.
                                           — J'-/& L01* B'-/&*,  
                                   “Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius” (1940)


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   5                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   6                                                                                                                          2/10/2023   11:36
                                  for reference only


                                   CONTENTS


              Introduction: Where Did It Go? ....................         000
                Wherein we meet our three protagonists and are introduced to the 
                problem that unites them

                      PART I. STANDING ON A SLIVER OF TIME

              1.  Unforgettable ...............................           000
                A man shows up in Moscow with an apparently ﬂawless memory, 
                and Borges writes a story pushing the idea to its extreme, touching on 
                a paradox unearthed by Kant and explored by Heisenberg

              2.  A Brief History of This Very Instant ................   000
                Kant’s struggle with Hume leads us back to ancient Greece, where we 
                encounter a very “queer creature,” the instant of change

              3.  Visualize This! ...............................         000
                Heisenberg discovers discontinuity at the heart of reality and defends 
                his chunky model against Schrödinger’s smooth waves

                               PART II. NOT BEING GOD

              4.  Entanglements ..............................            000
                Citing special relativity, Einstein sides with Schrödinger, and they 
                come up with a crazy thought experiment that turns the physics 
                world on its head


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   7                                           2/10/2023   11:36
                                  for reference only

            viii                        Contents 

              5.  Sub Specie Aeternitatis .........................      000
                Back in Prussia, Kant asks what knowledge would be like for an 
                omniscient being, and we are transported to the warring factions of 
                early Christianity

              6.  In the Blink of an Eye ..........................      000
                Borges turns to the kabbalistic idea of the aleph to get over Norah, 
                and ﬁnds new love while exploring the paradoxes of simultaneity

                  PART III. DOES THE UNIVERSE HAVE AN EDGE?

              7.  The Universe (Which Others Call the Library) ......... 000
                As his country ﬂirts with fascism, Borges organizes the shelves of a 
                municipal library he imagines to be without borders

              8.  Gravitas ...................................           000
                Heisenberg’s conversations with Einstein reveal an underlying 
                reconciliation between relativity and quantum mechanics in a vision 
                of the cosmos foreseen by Dante

              9.  Made to Measure .............................          000
                Kant writes his third and ﬁnal “Critique,” and his notion of beauty 
                paves the way for an understanding of what guides inquiry in the 
                physical sciences

                         PART IV. THE ABYSS OF FREEDOM

             10.  Free Will ..................................           000
                Kant’s search for free will in a deterministic cosmos conjures the 
                Roman patrician Boethius, who salvages freedom from fate while 
                awaiting execution for treason in a dungeon in Pavia

             11.  Forking Paths ...............................          000
                The physicist Hugh Everett has the wild idea that new universes are 
                birthed continuously, and Borges explores the same idea in a spy story

             12.  Putting the Demon to Rest ......................       000
                Heisenberg defends his decisions during the war, as we consider what 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   8                                           2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Contents                       ix

              his discovery meant for questions of free will and determinism

             Postscript ..................................       000
              Wherein we see how Borges, Kant, and Heisenberg, each in his own 
              way, worked to undermine the e!ects of metaphysical prejudice

             Acknowledgments .............................       000
             Notes  .....................................        000
             Bibliography ................................       000
             Further Reading ..............................      000
             Index  .....................................        000


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   9                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   10                                                                                                                         2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                           INTRODUCTION:               
                         WHERE DID IT GO?


                %'-$2,  (&3'-& 45:55 on  the  evening  of  May  21,  1927,  a 
                plane dropped out of the clouds northwest of Paris. A.er ﬂy-
           Sing over the city and twice circling the Ei7el Tower, it headed 
           northeast toward the normally sleepy airﬁeld at Le Bourget. No one 
           could  have  been  more  surprised  than  the  plane’s  single  pilot,  an 
           unknown American who looked more boyish than his twenty-ﬁve  
           years,  to  see  the  teeming  crowds  awaiting  him.  When  he  landed 
           his plane at 10:32 that night, the young man had been ﬂying for 
           more than thirty- three hours. By the time he fell asleep early the 
           next morning— a.er ﬁghting free from the crowds that pulled him 
           from his plane, talking to the crush of international press that had 
           gathered to cover his unprecedented feat, and taking a hot bath at 
           the ambassador’s residence in Paris—he  had been awake for more 
           than sixty hours.1
              By becoming the ﬁrst human being to ﬂy alone across the Atlan-
           tic, Charles Lindbergh went from an unassuming postal pilot to the 
           world’s most famous person—literally  overnight. His accomplish-
           ment was an example of extraordinary skill and courage, one that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   11                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xii            Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           many others had failed to achieve in the years and months before, 
           o.en perishing in the process. But the crowds at Le Bourget, and 
           later  in  New  York,  and  indeed  everywhere  Lindbergh  would  go 
           from then on, weren’t just celebrating one man’s exploit.
             For underlying Lindbergh’s undeniable skill—his  ﬂawless navi-
           gation alone and at night; his constant adjustment of altitude; his 
           nerve- racking  battle  with  fatigue—was   a  magniﬁcent  ediﬁce  of 
           science  and  engineering  that  had  just  propelled  a  single  human 
           being in little more than a day across a distance that had previously 
           required weeks and even months. This was an extension of the stun-
           ning  human  capacity  for  knowledge  that  had  in  recent  centuries 
           navigated the globe and built the railroads and would eventually 
           place a man on the moon. A triumph of engineering, to be sure, but 
           also of the laws of motion that Sir Isaac Newton had put to paper 
           more than two hundred years earlier, and that had been powering 
           humanity’s remarkable progress ever since. For in tracing that path 
           from Roosevelt Field in New York to Le Bourget, Charles Lindbergh 
           had moved a greater distance in a shorter time than any human in 
           history. Little could he know that barely a thousand kilometers from 
           the airport where he landed that evening, the very idea of what it 
           means for an object to move through space was being turned on its 
           head forever.


           "* 21#8(&-/% +"* 9")1#/ his historic ﬂight, another young man 
           was being driven to distraction in a quiet dwelling in Copenhagen. 
           That was where the Danish physicist and Nobel laureate Niels Bohr 
           waged a daily war of attrition against his twenty-ﬁ ve- year- old Ger-
           man  assistant,  Werner  Heisenberg,  dismantling  the  young  man’s 
           most recent paper in a relentless series of bombardments.
             While not yet the full professor he would become later that year 
           when he accepted the chair of theoretical physics at Leipzig, Heisen-
           berg  had  already  laid  the  groundwork  two  years  prior  for  what 
           would be formalized by the end of 1927 as quantum mechanics—a  


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   12                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?          xiii

           mathematical  model  of  hair- curling complexity  whose  power  is 
           such that it continues to hold today, almost a hundred years and at 
           least that many profound discoveries later. Heisenberg would him-
           self win the Nobel Prize ﬁve years later for one of the two watershed 
           papers  he  had  written  as  a  twenty- three- year- old.  But  the  current 
           battles with Bohr were about a new discovery, one that would shake 
           the foundations of science and thought and be forever attached to 
           Heisenberg’s name.
              The debate revolved around the ultimate nature of reality. Clas-
           sical  physics  had  always  assumed  that  objects  followed  the  same 
           laws of motion no matter their size. However, in 1913, Bohr had 
           demonstrated that inside the atom electrons behaved rather di7er-
           ently than macroscopic objects, in that they occupied distinct orbits 
           around the nucleus and appeared to “jump” from one to the other.2 
           The problem was this: If I jump from one step to another on my 
           stairs, everyone will grant that I continue to exist along the way. Par-
           adoxically, however, electrons show up in their new orbit without 
           seeming to have traveled in between. Moreover, they seem not even 
           to exist until they are detected, at which point they “decide” where 
           they have been all along. It was as if Charles Lindbergh didn’t exist 
           while crossing the Atlantic, and only came back into being when he 
           was sighted over France.


           '#  " *"$0-8", "3$&-#''#   of  the  previous  year,  a  deliriously 
           happy young poet arrived at a party in Buenos Aires. Erudite, fop-
           pish, and timid, Jorge Luis Borges, known as Georgie to his friends, 
           was attending a birthday luncheon for a fellow writer at the boat-
           ing pond in Palermo Park. The source of Borges’s delight was on 
           his arm that day, a rising novelist and poet of Scandinavian descent 
           named Norah Lange.
              It had been a good year for Borges. The Buenos Aires literary 
           scene was starting to pull back from its sycophantic adulation of the 
           European avant-garde,  whose once risqué leaders were wealthy, set-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   13                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xiv            Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           tled, and now far more likely to be feted and pampered by the bour-
           geoisie than to shock them. This shi. favored Borges, whose poetry 
           at the time tended toward the romantic and locally ﬂavored. While 
           thoroughly  cosmopolitan,  his  tastes  were  anchored  in  Argentina 
           to the point where he and his literary compatriots would shower 
           disdain on the musicians who dared to play faddish new forms of 
           tango at the famed Café Tortoni.
             In this group of friends Norah Lange shone like a lodestar. As one 
           of the companions would later recount, deep into a night of drink-
           ing they would slip out to the corner bar “with the goddesses of that 
           Wagnerian paradise.” Upon returning, “Norah, she of the long ﬂam-
           ing hair, would regain her throne and scepter, extend both hands to 
           silence the uproar, and proceed to recite . . . , her poems never fail-
           ing to calm the storm and induce a sunrise of the purest emotion.”3 
           Indeed, in some of those poems we can sense her ardor for her lover 
           and mentor Borges, which she likens to the “dew drawn to a freshly 
           opened rose.”4
             Borges, for his part, felt alive like never before. And his writing 
           reﬂected that. The words of a poet, of any writer, had to amount to 
           a fusion of souls, imparting the truths of one’s innermost experi-
           ence; writing was to be “a full confession of the self.”5 Even under 
           a  ﬁctional  facade,  the  author’s  autobiographical  substance  would 
           be “like a heart beating in the depths.”6 Indeed, it would be fair to 
           say that the relationship with Norah had provoked some unchar-
           acteristic  writing  on  Borges’s  part.  Carlos  Mastronardi,  a  fellow 
           writer and friend, would later recall that for one of the few times 
           in his life Borges seemed to have little desire to be anyone other 
           than himself. As Borges wrote at the time in an essay with the dis-
           tinctly un- Borgesian title “Writing Happiness,” he couldn’t imagine 
           “the negation of all consciousness, of all sensation, of all di7eren-
           tiation in time or space.”7 Mastronardi’s surprise was justiﬁed. His 
           friend  had  a  well- deserved  reputation  for  morbid  obsessions  and 
           had publicly mused that a human being’s sense of consciousness 
           and identity over time was little else than a desperate illusion veiling 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   14                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?           xv

           an existential void.
              Sadly, for Borges, if not for literary posterity, this reverie was not 
           to last. On that spring a.ernoon at the party beside the lake, Norah 
           shared  a  table  with  another  writer,  Oliverio  Girondo,  whose  ease 
           at  conversation  and  charm  with  women  contrasted  starkly  with 
           Borges’s own awkward demeanor. As they chatted and drank, a tipsy 
           Norah upset a bottle of red wine. Oliverio, never at a loss for words, 
           leaned in and quipped, “Blood will ﬂow between us.”8 The woman 
           who came on Georgie’s arm was soon dancing with Oliverio. She 
           would leave with him as well.


           199"#0&2  )"#$ +"* '(*&**&8 with his bowels. During the sum-
           mer of 1776, when elsewhere revolution was in the air, Kant couldn’t 
           take a shit. A hypochondriacal bachelor in his early ﬁ.ies and an 
           established professor at the local university, he was in most respects 
           entirely  healthy.  Indeed,  he  would  live  for  another  twenty- eight 
           years, far longer than most of his friends and colleagues. Still, Kant’s 
           digestive worries were a matter of great consequence. As he took 
           his daily walks that summer, he had yet to publish a single one of 
           the seminal works that would later earn his place as the founder of 
           modern philosophy. His inability to get his gut in order was causing 
           him to have confused thoughts— a considerable obstacle for some-
           one aiming to put philosophy’s house in order. Finally published 
           ﬁve years later, those thoughts would be complicated enough for 
           those who would endeavor to read them, but in his current state of 
           distraction Kant could barely make sense of them himself.
              Not  that  Kant  wished  his  philosophy  to  be  abstruse.  Unlike 
           some  traditionalists  who  railed  against  the  idea  that  the  human 
           mind should be planted with more ideas than those needed for each 
           person to become adept at his or her calling, Kant believed in the 
           democratic  di7usion  of  knowledge. That  same  year  the  conserva-
           tive thinker J. G. Schlosser wrote, “Why do you castrate oxen and 
           colts when you prepare them for the yoke and the cart, yet wish to 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   15                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xvi            Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           develop the totality of human powers in men similarly condemned 
           to the yoke and the cart?”9 Kant wholly and passionately opposed 
           such prejudice. To deprive a human being, any human being, of the 
           opportunity  to  cultivate  his  or  her  own  mind  was  to  undermine 
           the free use of reason that Kant believed an essential part of being 
           human.  To achieve  that  universality,  though,  Kant’s  own  philoso-
           phy would require both clarity and precision. Already the lecture he 
           gave on the occasion of attaining the rank of magister years earlier 
           had been titled “Of the Easier and More Thorough Presentation of 
           Philosophy”— evidence of his conviction that education should be 
           universally accessible, yes, but also a source of irritation to the gen-
           erations since who have naturally found Kant’s major philosophical 
           works to be rather tough going.
             It was the ﬁrst of those works, published in the summer of 1781, 
           that would lay the groundwork for all philosophy to come. The vol-
           ume in question, the famed Critique of Pure Reason, is a doorstop 
           of  a  book.  As  Kant’s  fellow  philosopher  and  frequent  correspon-
           dent Johann Georg Hamann remarked upon receiving the proofs, 
           “Such a fat book is neither ﬁtting for the author’s stature nor for the 
           concept of pure reason, which he opposes to such lazy- assed reason 
           as my own.”10 But in its impressive he. Kant had distilled several 
           decades of thinking about the very limits of human knowledge and, 
           speciﬁcally,  how  a  failure  to  recognize  and  take  account  of  those 
           limits would produce mind- boggling paradoxes, paradoxes that had 
           been bewildering human beings for millennia.


           $%& 91882&- :2"** *'# '3 a classics professor, Heisenberg excelled 
           at  pretty  much  everything.  Athletic,  a  committed  scout  and  out-
           doorsman, and a talented pianist, he could have chosen any num-
           ber of academic or artistic paths. But of all his talents, Heisenberg 
           showed  a  particular  aptitude  for  math.  At  sixteen  he  was  already 
           tutoring local university students in the subject. And it was his prow-
           ess with a pencil and an iconoclastic attitude toward long-accepted  


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   16                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?         xvii

           certainties that led to his ﬁrst landmark: a backbreaking latticework 
           of calculations able to account for the strange disappearances and 
           reappearances of fundamental particles.
              To  Heisenberg’s  chagrin,  in  the  year  a.er  he  published  his 
           groundbreaking paper laying the cornerstone of quantum mechan-
           ics, an older, more established physicist published a theory he called 
           wave mechanics. For the theorists who were wrestling with the her-
           culean “matrix algebra” Heisenberg’s approach required, the urbane 
           Erwin Schrödinger’s elegant and relatively simply calculations were 
           a relief. Even Heisenberg had to admit Schrödinger’s equation was 
           easier  to  work  with.  To  Heisenberg’s  great  annoyance,  however, 
           Schrödinger wasn’t willing to let the math stand on its own. Instead, 
           he insisted on using the language of classical physics to try to visual-
           ize what was going on at the quantum level.
              Brash and headstrong, Heisenberg averred that quantum mechan-
           ics  constituted  an  entirely  new  physical  model;  if  its  conclusions 
           seemed  strange  or  even  paradoxical,  so  be  it.  Schrödinger  would 
           have none of this. He believed his elegant equation described real, 
           physical waves and that electrons, photons, and other particle-like  
           manifestations of matter or energy appeared like frothy wave caps 
           on a tumultuous sea. If we don’t know exactly when and where such 
           a cap will present itself, that’s merely because we can’t see sharply 
           enough to make out the water beneath the surface, not because the 
           wave isn’t there.
              Both Heisenberg and Niels Bohr disagreed, believing quantum 
           discontinuity was real. But where Heisenberg was ready to jettison 
           the continuous model of classical physics altogether, Bohr wanted 
           to hold on to it and ﬁnd a way to make the two modes communi-
           cate. This was the source of their arguments from late 1926 into the 
           spring of 1927. In fact, the strife got so intense that in February, Bohr 
           and his wife decided to go skiing. Without Heisenberg. It was during 
           those weeks of relative solitude that Werner had his breakthrough.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   17                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xviii          Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           (":) 1# (0&#'* "1-&*, Borges nursed his broken heart. The months 
           since Norah rejected him had been one long onslaught of recurrent 
           humiliations. Oliverio had decamped for Europe, leaving behind a 
           love- struck Norah and luring Borges with desperate hopes of recon-
           ciliation. But his almost daily attempts to call on Norah, which play 
           out in a roman à clef she published less than a year later, served only 
           to remind him how cold her heart had turned to the man for whom 
           she had once written the most impassioned poems.
             Norah dealt Borges a fatal blow on a late April day, in the form 
           of a review she published of his latest book of poems with the icy 
           title “Thinking of Jorge Luis Borges in Something That Does Not 
           Quite Manage to Be a Poem.”11 The despair that ensued waxed philo-
           sophical.  Where  before  the  ﬁnal  rupture  Borges  had  rhapsodized 
           about the confessional transparency of writing, the bond it could 
           fuse between two lovers, he now sounded his ﬁrst notes of skepti-
           cism. Far from a medium of communion between two souls, lan-
           guage had become a “hemisphere of lies and shadows,” the “ﬁckle 
           and contingent” meaning of words constituting “the general tragedy 
           of all writing.”12 He now believed the promise of transcending the 
           fundamental opacity of words was but a fantasy, a power only angels 
           possessed, forever denied to those he termed “never-angels,”  the ulti-
           mate and irreducible status of mortals.13
             The loss of his beloved changed Borges. Soon he would publish 
           his  last  poem  for  many  years,  during  which  time  he  would  turn 
           almost exclusively to the short-form  ﬁction and essays that would 
           earn him his place in history. It would be more than thirty years 
           before Jorge Luis Borges would be snatched from the relative obscu-
           rity of Buenos Aires by receiving, along with Samuel Beckett, the 
           1961  International  Publishers’ Prize, in  an  instant  transforming  a 
           depressive Argentine nebbish into one of the world’s most lionized 
           and inﬂuential writers. For now, however, he snapped out of his tem-
           porary reveries and returned to a more potent suspicion that the 
           self’s experience of permanence and solidity in time and space was 
           illusory.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   18                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?          xix

              In short, he started thinking about tortoises.


           1# $%& 9'#$%*   !-1'- to  Heisenberg’s  stay  at  Bohr’s  house  in 
           Copenhagen, physicists  had  been  aware  of  a  nagging  problem. It 
           seemed that their models could home in on the location of a parti-
           cle quite well; they could also describe its momentum with impres-
           sive  accuracy.  Maddeningly,  however,  they  didn’t  seem  able  to  do 
           both. As Heisenberg’s friend and colleague Wolfgang Pauli put it, it 
           was as if one of your eyes could see a particle’s momentum and the 
           other could see its position, “but if you open both eyes at the same 
           time you will go crazy.”14
              One  cold  winter  evening  while  the  Bohrs  were  away  skiing, 
           Heisenberg took a walk in a park not far from their house. It was 
           on this walk that he came upon his solution: the image of a discrete 
           object  moving  through  time  and  space  that  had  been  so  success-
           ful for classical physics—indeed,  that would manifest itself in Lind-
           bergh’s famous ﬂight later that very spring—simply  didn’t apply to 
           the behavior of reality at the quantum level. It wasn’t merely that 
           the physicist isn’t able to see a particle’s position and momentum at 
           the same time; astoundingly, the particle doesn’t have a momentum 
           and a position in any meaningful sense until the physicist decides to 
           measure one or the other.
              Werner  knew  he  was  onto  something.  But  he  was  sure  Bohr 
           would have objections, and he desperately wanted to get his ideas 
           out into the world. A.er a rapid correspondence with Pauli, who 
           reacted enthusiastically, Heisenberg took advantage of his mentor’s 
           absence and feverishly wrote an article he submitted on March 22 
           to Germany’s leading journal of physics. A few weeks later he wrote 
           a summary for nonspecialists in which he explained that quantum 
           phenomena required us to put aside Newtonian mechanics. When 
           it comes to quanta he wrote, “the more precisely we determine the 
           position, the more imprecise is the determination of velocity.”15
              This fact had profound consequences for the most basic assump-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   19                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xx             Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           tions of the classical scientiﬁc worldview. Since Newton had expos-
           ited the laws of motion, scientists had accepted the notion proposed 
           most famously by the French mathematician Pierre- Simon Laplace, 
           that  perfect  knowledge  of  an  object’s  position  and  momentum 
           and the forces acting on it in the present will yield perfect knowl-
           edge of all its future permutations. Heisenberg’s discovery put this 
           determinism to rest. As he put it, “In the strict formulation of causal 
           law— if we know the present, we can calculate the future—it  is not 
           the  conclusion  that  is  wrong  but  the  premise.”16  The  uncertainty 
           principle, as it came to be known, showed with inescapable, math-
           ematical precision that such full knowledge of the present moment 
           wasn’t just hard to pin down; it was actually impossible.


           $%& $'-$'1*&* $%"$ !'!02"$&8 Borges’s imagination were twenty- 
           ﬁve  hundred  years  old.  One  a.ernoon  in  Athens,  a  young  phi-
           losopher  named  Socrates  came  to  the  Agora  to  meet  a  venerable 
           thinker, Parmenides, who was visiting from the far- o7 land of Elea. 
           Parmenides had brought with him a tall, handsome acolyte named 
           Zeno. Zeno had become known for a brief book he had written to 
           demolish  all  those  who  would  seek  to  oppose  Parmenides’s  doc-
           trines. Motion, he argued, was an illusion. To demonstrate his point, 
           he told a fanciful parable about the great warrior Achilles facing a 
           tortoise in a foot race. The gist of the story was that as long as the tor-
           toise had a head start to begin with, Achilles could never catch up. 
           That’s because to cross any distance at all, Achilles would ﬁrst have 
           to cross some fraction of it, and then a fraction of the remaining 
           distance, and so on. A bit like making a cookie last forever by only 
           ever eating half of what remains, even though the distances Achilles 
           would have to cross would grow inﬁnitely smaller, there was also no 
           limit to how many of such distances he would have to cross. Ergo, 
           Zeno concluded, Achilles could never catch up.
             Shortly a.er losing Norah Lange, Borges had become fascinated 
           with Zeno’s paradox.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   20                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?          xxi

              He reviewed the history of “solutions” to the problem, ultimately 
           concluding that most of them were simply expositions rather than 
           refutations. Where the great John Stuart Mill had pointed out that 
           while Achilles may indeed run forever, that “eternity will not see 
           the end of twelve seconds,” Borges dryly countered, “That methodi-
           cal dissolution, that boundless descent into more and more min-
           ute precipices, is not really hostile to the problem; imagining it is 
           the  problem.”17  It  is  we  who  create  the  problem,  Borges  realized, 
           by the very way we imagine the race. We attribute to Achilles and 
           to the tortoise (as we do to ourselves and indeed to all objects) a 
           persistence in time and space. When we slice time and space into 
           the inﬁnitesimal chunks that Achilles and the tortoise have to cross, 
           we  simultaneously  impose  on  them  and  their  experience  a  fabri-
           cated continuity of our own design. We imagine, in other words, a 
           continuous movement between and beneath our measurements of 
           their progress.
              The paradox of Zeno, Borges wrote, “is an attempt upon not only 
           the reality of space but the more invulnerable and sheer reality of 
           time. . . . [E]xistence in a physical body, immobile permanence, the 
           ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life, are challenged by such an adventure.”18 
           Like Heisenberg working feverishly on the other side of the world, 
           as he explored the limits of perception, Borges peered into the abyss 
           of an apparent paradox. And like Heisenberg, instead of shying away 
           from this paradox, he chose to reexamine his most basic assump-
           tions about time, space, and causality.
              For the rest of his long and vibrant career, Borges would remain 
           haunted by the ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life, an a.ernoon when his 
           beloved’s gaze turned elsewhere, and he lost faith in the persistence 
           of his own being in space and time. Over decades, Borges would 
           obsessively  conjure  characters  whose  special  abilities  and  most 
           urgent  desires  reveal  for  them  a  paradoxical  disconnect  between 
           knowledge and the world.
              The greatest wizard, Borges speculated, would be the one whose 
           spell is so convincing that he could fool even himself into believing 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   21                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xxii           Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           its appearances were real. “Would this not be our case?” he asks.19 
           And then adds, “We (the undivided divinity operating within us) 
           have dreamt the world. We have dreamt it as ﬁrm, mysterious, vis-
           ible, ubiquitous in space and durable in time; but in its architecture 
           we have allowed tenuous and eternal crevices of unreason which tell 
           us it is false.” Where do we ﬁnd those crevices of unreason? Borges 
           leaves one further clue as to the hidden protagonist of the adventure 
           challenging our notions of time and space: “Let us admit what all 
           idealists admit: the hallucinatory nature of the world. Let us do what 
           no idealist has done: seek unrealities which conﬁrm that nature. We 
           shall ﬁnd them, I believe, in the antinomies of Kant.”20


           $%& *$"$&8 !0-!'*& '3 the colossus that Hamann received in 1781 
           was  to  put  science  on  a  sure  footing. That  footing  had, for  Kant, 
           been shaken by the writings of a gloomy Scot by the name of David 
           Hume, whom Kant credited with having “interrupted my dogmatic 
           slumber.”21 (Indeed, a professor of mine once complained that the 
           worst thing Hume ever did was awaken Kant and thus subject pos-
           terity to having to read him.) According to Hume, absolutely every-
           thing we know about the world comes from our senses. Not only 
           does  this  mean  we  can  easily  be  wrong  about  what  we  think  we 
           know; even worse, we have no basis to suppose that such “certain-
           ties” as Isaac Newton’s laws of motion are anything other than hab-
           its we’ve acquired through repeated exposure to similar impressions.
             This notion troubled Kant. If it were true, it would upend his faith 
           in the universality of reason, the very basis for our claim to derive 
           scientiﬁc laws that explain the world around us. Every attempt to say 
           something true about the world would have no more validity than 
           a subjective assertion. And if objective truth about the world were 
           lost, there could be no basis for arbitrating disputes about morality 
           or, much less, taste. Soon a.er reading Hume, Kant believed he had 
           discovered a way forward. But more than a decade would pass from 
           the ﬁrst ﬁts and starts of his thinking to the morning of July 22, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   22                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?         xxiii

           1781, when the printed and bound Critique of Pure Reason would 
           land with a propitious thud on Hamann’s breakfast table.
              What Kant managed to work out in his Critique is something 
           so profound that few people fully grasp its implications even today. 
           Hume  and  pretty  much  everyone  else  had  made  an  unwarranted 
           assumption about what goes on when we perceive something. That 
           assumption is that we are correct in visualizing reality in itself as 
           being  consistent  with  our  image  of  it.  But  our  perceptions,  Kant 
           realized, aren’t things in the world; rather, they are versions of those 
           things that we construct in our minds by shaping them in space and 
           time. When we imagine the world as being identical to our concep-
           tion of it— when we assume, speciﬁcally, that space and time are fun-
           damentally real— our reason becomes faulty, and science responds 
           with paradox.
              Kant didn’t stop there. In the second half of the book he went 
           on to describe in detail the kinds of paradoxes that pop up when we 
           fail to make this distinction and mistakenly assume that time and 
           space are inherent to the world. He called one class of these errors 
           antinomies— those crevices of unreason that Borges credited with 
           conﬁrming the hallucinatory nature of the world. Speciﬁcally, Kant 
           wrote, we can picture reality as being consistent and continuous, or 
           as being broken into discrete chunks, and we can make perfectly 
           logical and coherent arguments supporting both conclusions even 
           though those conclusions explicitly contradict each other. This happens 
           because we assume something about reality that only comes into 
           play when we observe it.


           %&1*&#(&-/ +"* :'#;1#:&8 1$ made no sense to think of particles 
           having position or momentum prior to observing one or the other. 
           He also believed he knew why. A particle’s trajectory, the course it 
           runs, didn’t come into being until it was realized by the act of mea-
           suring it. What we know to be the case for Lindbergh, that he con-
           tinued to exist a.er leaving Nova Scotia and before appearing again 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   23                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xxiv           Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

           in the skies over Paris, and that he took a speciﬁc path to get there, 
           simply is not the case for reality at its smallest levels. Heisenberg 
           wrote to Wolfgang Pauli of his mind- bending discovery in words 
           that would go on to shake the foundations of modern science: the 
           path a particle takes “only comes into existence through this, that 
           we observe it.”22
             Like  Borges’s  wizard,  when  we  observe  the  world,  we  make  a 
           map or mental picture of it. And we make that map ubiquitous in 
           space and durable in time. But there are fundamental ﬂaws in the 
           image we create of the world, those that Kant termed antinomies. 
           Like an imperfection in an otherwise ﬂawless gemstone, it would be 
           a mistake to try to eradicate them. For the ﬂaws are inseparable from 
           knowledge itself.
             On a walk together in 1926, a venerated older scientist pressed 
           the younger Heisenberg on the weakness he saw disqualifying his 
           approach— that he was jettisoning our long- held belief in the inde-
           pendence of reality from our observations of it. Heisenberg pushed 
           back. Had not the renowned professor himself come up with his 
           own epochal discovery by overturning our most basic assumptions 
           about time and space?
             “Possibly I did,” Albert Einstein grudgingly conceded, “but it is 
           nonsense all the same.”23


           '#& '3 $%& /-&"$ tools humans have developed since the rise of 
           modernity is science. At its core science is a way of looking at the 
           world that foregrounds intellectual humility. It refuses on principle 
           to  know  more  than  it  can  know  at  any  given  time. But  even  the 
           greatest scientists aren’t immune to projecting their prejudices on 
           the world. Einstein— a man so brilliant that even his self-proclaimed  
           blunders have an irritating propensity to turn out true—also  had a 
           tendency, especially in his later years, to lecture his fellow physicists 
           in religious terms about what they should expect to discover about 
           the ultimate nature of reality. In fact, his now famous quips about 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   24                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                          Introduction: Where Did It Go?          xxv

           God being subtle but not malicious, or “the Old One” not throwing 
           dice, ﬁnally led an exasperated Niels Bohr to beg the great man to 
           “stop telling God what to do.”24
              For all their profound di7erences, Jorge Luis Borges, Immanuel 
           Kant, and Werner Heisenberg shared an uncommon immunity to 
           the temptation to think they knew God’s secret plan. Each in his 
           own way resisted the urge to project essential aspects of how human 
           beings experience reality onto reality itself, independent of how we 
           know it. Indeed, Heisenberg’s disruption of classical physics had its 
           roots in an iconoclastic countercurrent to a powerful human ten-
           dency to conjure the ultimate nature of reality in our imagination, 
           and then go out and discover it. There is indeed rigor in the world, 
           as Borges famously wrote, but “humanity has forgotten, and con-
           tinues to forget, that it is the rigor of chess masters, not of angels.”25
              Knowledge is man- made, our own way of making sense of a real-
           ity whose ultimate nature may not conform to our conceptions of 
           it. Is the saturated red of a Vermeer part of that ultimate reality? The 
           so. fuzz of a peach’s skin? The exalted crescendo of a Beethoven 
           symphony? If we can grasp that such powerful experiences require 
           the active engagement of observers and listeners, is it not possible, 
           likely even, that the other phenomena we encounter have a similar 
           origin? When we do the opposite, we forget the role we have in cre-
           ating our own reality.
              In their lives, struggles, and obsessions, Borges, Heisenberg, and 
           Kant pushed far enough against the limits of imagination, observa-
           tion,  and  thought  to  unearth  the  antinomies  engendered  by  that 
           forgetting. This book is divided into four sections, each of which 
           revolves around one of those antinomies: Are space and time inﬁ-
           nitely divisible, or are they composed of indivisible chunks? Is there 
           something like a supreme and unconditional being, or is everything 
           in existence conditioned and a7ected by something else? Is there a 
           spatial or temporal edge to the universe, or does it extend inﬁnitely 
           with no beginning or border? Are we free to choose our path in life, 
           or is our every choice determined by the physical world we live in?26


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   25                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           xxvi           Introduction: Where Did It Go? 

             The  sections  in  turn  contain  three  chapters,  each  of  which 
           focuses  primarily  on  one  of  our  protagonists,  the  inﬂuences  that 
           were decisive for him, how he grappled with that antinomy in the 
           realm  of  science,  literature,  or  philosophy,  and  how  that  struggle 
           ultimately paved the path toward his understanding of how knowl-
           edge structures reality. Thus our story opens, however improbably, 
           with a Russian journalist who discovers he has a gi. that is also a 
           curse: a near- perfect memory. We then join Borges as he, prodded 
           by  the  desire  to  recover  the  receding  moments  of  bliss  of  a  shat-
           tered romance, probes the paradoxes of what memory and percep-
           tion entail. Using ﬁction to ﬁle away at the imperfections of human 
           knowledge, he imagines a character who can perceive and remem-
           ber everything, perfectly, with no gap in space or loss in time. In so 
           doing he reveals the very insight that ignited Kant’s revolution in 
           thought: an observation of the world can never be perfectly of the 
           world; it always requires something else, the insertion of a minimal 
           distance that permits it to become knowledge in the ﬁrst place.
             In the chapters that ensue, we delve into the realm of the impos-
           sibly small; we stretch our minds to encompass everything at once; 
           we travel to the beginning of time and the edge of existence; and we 
           search for an iota of freedom in the mechanistic chain of nature. As 
           we make this journey, we will be rocked by the astonishing implica-
           tions that these thinkers’ collective discoveries had for our concep-
           tions of beauty, science, and what we owe to each other in the brief 
           time given to us in this universe.
             In telling the stories of Borges, Kant, and Heisenberg, this book 
           also tells the story of those before them who caught a glimpse of the 
           truth, who unearthed the tenuous and eternal crevices of unreason 
           underlying our picture of the real. It tells a cautionary tale about the 
           danger of assuming reality must conform to the image we construct 
           of it, and the damage that our ﬁdelity to such a seductive ideal can 
           wreak. Most of all, it sings an ode to the boundless potential of our 
           knowledge, once we have worked ourselves free from the blinders 
           imposed by imagined perfection.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   26                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                              Part I

                                                   STANDING ON                                                                      
                                       A SLIVER OF TIME


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   1                                                                                                                          2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   2                                                                                                                          2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                       1

                          UNFORGETTABLE


               $ +"* '#2, 918- 9'-#1#/ on  April  13,  1929,  but  Solomon 
               Shereshevsky was already having a bad day. The journalist had 
           Ijust attended the daily editorial meeting of his Moscow news-
           paper when his section editor called him into his o<ce. What was 
           Shereshevsky playing at? his agitated superior asked him. Why did 
           he just stare at the editor while he ran over the day’s stories? Was he 
           too full of himself to take notes like all the other reporters?
              Nonplussed, Shereshevsky explained that he didn’t need to take 
           notes, because he remembered everything the editor said. Then he 
           proceeded to recite the entire meeting back to him. Verbatim.
              By  that  a.ernoon  Shereshevsky  found  himself  amid  a  gaggle 
           of psychiatrists at the Academy of Communist Education, among 
           whom was a young doctor, Alexander Luria. Luria took on the task 
           of  testing  Shereshevsky’s  memory,  which  he  did  by  reading  him 
           increasingly long lists of random words and numbers and asking 
           him to recall them. By the end of the day Luria had to admit that the 
           capacity of Shereshevsky’s memory “had no distinct limits.”1
              As  Shereshevsky  would  later  recount,  until  that  day  he  had 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   3                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           4               THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           no  idea  his  abilities  were  anything  other  than  normal.  When  he 
           returned to work, he delivered to his editor the verdict of the state’s 
           psychiatric experts: his memory exceeded “the bounds of what was 
           believed to be physically possible.” His editor promptly advised him 
           to change careers. So Shereshevsky found a circus trainer to manage 
           him and began booking shows around the country as a mnemonist.2
             Despite  his  natural  talent,  Shereshevsky  had  to  work  hard  at 
           his new career, and he developed techniques to push his capacity 
           ever further. To be able to recite back the lists of numbers, random 
           words, poems in foreign languages, and even nonsensical syllables 
           that audience members would  call out to  him, he landed on  the 
           strategy of picturing them drawn on a chalkboard. When it came 
           time to recall the lists, he would return to this mental chalkboard 
           and simply read from it out loud. To his horror he soon discovered 
           that the very indelibility of his memory could interfere with his per-
           formance. Closing his eyes and ﬁnding his way back to the board 
           on which he had arranged the sounds and images, he might instead 
           come upon the board from an earlier performance and read back 
           that  list.  To counteract  this  danger,  he  found  he  had  to  mentally 
           erase or otherwise destroy the writing on his mental board. In short, 
           to remember better, he had to learn to forget.
             This interference didn’t wane with time. Luria, who continued 
           to  study  Shereshevsky  for  decades,  discovered  he  could  ﬂawlessly 
           recall  lists  Luria  had  used  to  test  him  ﬁ.een  years  prior.  In  fact, 
           Shereshevsky waged an almost constant war against the images and 
           associations from the past that threatened to ﬂood his every waking 
           moment.
             It  wasn’t  just  memories  that  menaced  his  perception  of  the 
           present. Shereshevsky su7ered from synesthesia, sensory crossover. 
           A sound of a certain pitch might produce a coppery taste on his 
           tongue; numbers appeared as speciﬁc ﬁgures with rich, unchanging 
           characteristics. For most of us, 87 is a number, say, of pages read or 
           years lived; Shereshevsky saw it as “a fat woman and a man twirling 
           his mustache.”3 He experienced numerals, in other words, as individ-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   4                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                     5

           uals, not instances of a general system. He once exerted intense e7ort 
           to memorize a vast table of numeric sequences, failing to notice that 
           it followed a rule of such simplicity that a child could reproduce it 
           ad inﬁnitum, because each line simply started with a higher integer 
           than the previous one.
              For  Luria  it  soon  became  clear  that  Shereshevsky’s  remark-
           able ability came with an equal disability. He lived in a world of 
           particulars, “rich in imagery, thematic elaboration, and a7ect,” but 
           also “peculiarly  lacking  in  one  important  feature:  the  capacity  to 
           convert  encounters  with  the  particular  into  instances  of  the  gen-
           eral.”4 To understand the intended meaning of a normal sentence, 
           Shereshevsky  had  to  overcome  his  sensual  experience  of  how  a 
           word sounded here and now; he had to forget his immersion in the 
           present and connect to a di7erent moment in space and time, an 
           endeavor that would at times prove impossible.
              In truth, he struggled mightily with the very aspect of language 
           that makes it function in human communication and knowledge. 
           Even  our  most  common  expressions  contain  words  that  we  use 
           ﬁguratively, or that have di7erent meanings in di7erent situations. 
           A nightmare for Shereshevsky. The simple act of “catching a cab” 
           would  present  him  with  a  barrage  of  possible  interpretations  to 
           contend with. As he would later explain to Luria, the word ekipazh 
           means cab, but it also means the crew of a ship. To understand the 
           one meaning, he had to “picture for myself not just a driver . . . in 
           the  cab  but  an  entire  sta7  manning  it. That’s  the  only  way  I  can 
           make sense of it.”5 Living in a world of particulars, being constantly 
           bathed in the immediate, makes communication a di<cult a7air. 
           Language loses its ability to connect two disparate agents, to trans-
           late the experience of the one into the context of the other. But more 
           than  just  a  stumbling  block  for  understanding  what  others  were 
           saying to him, in Shereshevsky’s world, as the neuroscientist Jerome 
           Bruner would later put it, “elements and features can be isolated, but 
           a ‘whole’ or meaningful picture cannot be put together.”6 Indeed, it 
           seems that the more perfect Shereshevsky’s extraordinary memory, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   5                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           6               THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           the less he had a coherent self who could remember.
             For a brief time, Shereshevsky’s feats brought him fame and a 
           sustainable existence. But even as stories of the man who couldn’t 
           forget seeped into the outside world, life behind Stalin’s iron cur-
           tain  was  getting  harder,  especially  for  Jews  like  Luria  and  Shere-
           shevsky.  A.er  the  war,  as  Stalin  consolidated  his  power  through 
           “anti- cosmopolitan” purges, Luria lost his position for a time and 
           took to keeping a bag packed in case the authorities came for him 
           in the night. Shereshevsky, who had refused to lend his talents to 
           the secret police, found himself followed and harassed, his perfor-
           mances interrupted, and his career eventually ruined.7 Luria would 
           regain his footing and become one of the preeminent neuropsychol-
           ogists of the twentieth century, his analysis of Shereshevsky a pro-
           found inﬂuence for later scientists like Jerome Bruner and Oliver 
           Sacks. Shereshevsky, for his part, learned another way of erasing or 
           at least dampening the remembered and perceived sensorium that 
           had become his prison house. He started drinking heavily and died 
           in obscurity a few years later.


           '# $%& *!-1#/ 8", when Solomon Shereshevsky met Alexander 
           Luria in Moscow, Jorge Luis Borges languished in a veritable winter 
           of discontent in Buenos Aires. Still aching for Norah Lange, Borges 
           experienced severe despondency and responded rashly. His long eve-
           ning walks through Buenos Aires took a self- destructive turn as he 
           deliberately ventured into barrios known for their villainy. One eve-
           ning as he and two writer friends made their way through the alleys 
           of  a  particularly  sketchy  neighborhood,  the  tapping  of  the  cane 
           Borges used to aid his ever-worsening  eyesight caught the attention 
           of some local thugs, who started to bait them. To the horror of his 
           companions, rather than join them in ﬂeeing, Borges turned to the 
           men  and  showered  them  with  insults,  such  that  all  three  friends 
           only narrowly escaped intact.8
             To  make  matters  worse,  while  Borges  slipped  into  an  early 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   6                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                     7

           decline, the source of his anguish had become nothing short of a 
           literary rock star. The Buenos Aires imprint Tor had chosen ten titles 
           from its list to release as the ﬁrst ever paperbacks in Argentina. Bank-
           ing on Norah Lange’s growing notoriety and the titillating premise 
           of a young woman’s sexual awakening during a transatlantic cross-
           ing on a ship, its editor, José Carlos Torrendel, chose her most recent 
           novel, 45 Days and 30 Sailors, to be one of them. Never one to miss 
           an opportunity to put on a show, Oliverio Girondo threw a party 
           in Norah’s honor that drew the crème de la crème of the literary 
           establishment. Incidentally, the male attendees all dressed as sailors. 
           Borges, naturally, did not attend.
              Who did attend, however, were two of the world’s most blazing 
           literary lights: the Spanish poet Federico García Lorca, and the Chil-
           ean Pablo Neruda, who would subsequently become, in the opinion 
           of another writer, “the greatest poet of the twentieth century, in any 
           language.”9 Norah became a ﬁxture in a riotous literary scene led 
           by Oliverio and his visiting friends Neruda and García Lorca, and 
           o.en played the scandalous centerpiece of their hijinks—as  when 
           they commandeered a milk truck and drove it to one of the busiest 
           intersections in Buenos Aires, where Norah ascended a policeman’s 
           podium and stopped the tra<c for an impromptu recital of one of 
           Neruda’s most beloved poems.10
              For his part, Borges had lost the ability to write poetry. Poetry 
           had required a faith he no longer could muster, a faith that human 
           language  enables  a  connection  between  two  souls  that  would 
           amount to the creation of a unity, a single identity between them. 
           Never mind joining souls; now Borges began to question whether 
           even the connections we posit between two observed events—the  
           touch of a hand, the blush of a cheek—had  basis in any reality other 
           than  his  own  mind.  And  if  such  observations  amounted  to  little 
           more  than  ephemeral  impressions, appearing  for  an  instant, only 
           to be lost forever in the river of time, not only could language not 
           connect people; he questioned if it made sense to believe a person 
           even existed on its sending or receiving end. No soul, no mind, no 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   7                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           8               THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           self at all.
             In a last desperate plea, Borges dedicated his next book, A Uni-
           versal History of Infamy, to Norah, o7ering her “that kernel of myself 
           that  I  have  saved,  somehow— the central  heart  that  deals  not  in 
           words, tra<cs not with dreams and is untouched by time, by joy, by 
           adversities.”11 Borges, it seems, was rapidly convincing himself that, 
           far from a kernel untouched by time, his sense of self was a mere 
           illusion, a sliver of nostalgia slowly drowning in a sea of evidence 
           auguring  for  the “nothingness  of  personality.” He  had  claimed  as 
           much in an essay he wrote with that very title as a twenty- two- year- 
           old, in which he already began tugging at the stitching that keeps 
           our belief in a coherent self from unraveling into ephemeral and 
           disconnected memories. When we imagine ourselves to be a con-
           sistent self enduring in time, Borges mused, perhaps we are merely 
           beguiled by the fact that some of our experiences seem to “occur 
           again in an imprecise way.”12
             Memory,  the  twenty- two- year- old Borges  had  ventured,  forms 
           the core of sel=ood, but memory merely concatenates a series of 
           impressions that evoke one another. The fantasia of his obsession 
           with Norah Lange had, for a time, banished this threat and replaced 
           it with the idea of a self that endures over time. Now disabused of 
           that hope, an older Borges, “a rueful and abandoned man,” would 
           again start to see the notion of a coherent self as little more than a 
           mirage conjured when, “in a state of passion, our memory inclines 
           to the intemporal.”13 And yet, even if that self amounted to nothing, 
           how he longed to hold on to its fragments, memories of lost attach-
           ments that could only bring him pain.
             The  ﬁrst  essay  he  published  a.er  accepting  the  ﬁnality  of  his 
           breakup with Norah dealt with the subject of hell. Tellingly, he omit-
           ted any iconic images of physical torment. Instead, he recounted a 
           dream in which he no longer understood who or where he was: “I 
           was ﬁlled with fear. I thought: this disconsolate wakefulness already 
           is  hell,  the  pointless  wakefulness  will  be  my  eternity.”14  When  he 
           later  read  Dante’s Divine  Comedy  and  declared  it  “perhaps  the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   8                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                     9

           highest work of literature, of all literatures,”15 Borges felt the Ital-
           ian poet had intentionally le. “a splinter of Hell stuck in the heart 
           of Paradise.”16 In what Borges would call “the most moving verses 
           ever achieved,” Dante imagines his beloved Beatrice smiling at him 
           one last time before turning away to be absorbed into the eternally 
           ecstatic contemplation of God that is reserved for the blessed.
              In contrast to a paradise that promised the subsumption of the 
           individual into the timeless unity of the divine mind, Borges found 
           aspects of Dante’s hell improbably attractive. For if you enter the 
           inferno, at the very least you are there, feeling and remembering the 
           whole time. The famously beautiful image of the illicit lovers Paolo 
           and Francesca, whose lawless desire damned them to being bu7eted 
           about for eternity in a whirlwind together, struck Borges as rather 
           less punitive than Beatrice’s obliteration as a distinct personality.17
              Attachment to a person or an object entails a relation sustained 
           over time. And a relation to something sustained over time inevita-
           bly implies its possible loss. That coherence over time encapsulating 
           the presence and the absence of an attachment is precisely what we 
           call a self. As the Spanish philosopher and author Miguel de Una-
           muno had put it in Tragic Sense of Life, “I was never made to tremble 
           by descriptions of hellﬁre, no matter how terrible, for I felt, always, 
           that the idea of nothingness was much more terrifying than Hell.”18 
           Like Unamuno, Borges yearned for the personal attachments of love 
           and friendship; he desired sel=ood, even if sel=ood could bring 
           him only pain.
              What would it entail to have an attachment and never lose it? To 
           remember something perfectly, not as past, but as still present? Take 
           a scene from your past, a moment that has stuck in your mind. You 
           may see a vague picture, the ﬂash of a recognizable face; a snippet 
           of dialogue plays in your ear. You also probably register an emotion: 
           wistfulness, nostalgia. The scene may bring a smile to your face, or 
           it may cause you to tear up. What you cannot do is re- create it per-
           fectly, sensation by sensation.
              But what if you could? What if your brain were like a powerful 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   9                                  2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           10              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           video recorder that stored not only every visual impulse received by 
           your retinas at every moment but also the timbre of every sound, 
           texture of every touch, every last whi7 of aroma, and each tingle on 
           your taste buds? What if you could access such moments at will?
             Most of us would jump at the chance to revisit select moments in 
           our past. Moments we look back on with longing now. When Odys-
           seus and Penelope were reunited a.er their two- decade separation, 
           Athena held back the long night and “likewise stayed the golden- 
           throned Dawn,”19 so that they could retain a little longer the ephem-
           eral sweetness of that incomparable pleasure. But as great as that gi. 
           was, how much greater would it be to relive the moment at will. To 
           return, in ﬁve-sense  Technicolor, to a few treasured minutes of pure 
           bliss, the ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life, before everything changed.
             But  you  can’t.  The  more  precisely  you  relive  the  past,  the  less 
           it  is  a  past  you  remember,  and  the  more  it  becomes  the  present, 
           vanishing before your eyes as the present always does. A truly per-
           fect replay would erase its very sense of being a replay altogether 
           because it would erase the connection between moments of time 
           that constitute the one remembering, the self. A perfect memory is 
           impossible because it destroys the very self who remembers. Like 
           for Unamuno, the hell that haunted Borges’s dreams was the pros-
           pect of losing that sense of self that provided the basis for all attach-
           ments, all memories. Even if the alternative was an eternity of pain.
             History of Eternity, the book Borges wrote in 1935, was published 
           the following year. While in some ways a turning point in his intel-
           lectual development, it was a low ebb in his fortunes as a writer, 
           selling  only  thirty- seven  copies  and  garnering  almost  no  critical 
           attention at the time. Its themes and concerns, however, would give 
           shape to the Borges to come. Less than a decade later Borges would 
           publish to resounding success two sets of his stories as a combined 
           volume under the simple title Fictions. The second group of six sto-
           ries he called Artiﬁces. And the opening story is about a man who 
           loses his ability to forget.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   10                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    11

           "* " ,'0#/ 9"#, Kant marveled at a prediction made by one of 
           his professors, Martin Knutzen, that a comet that had last appeared 
           in the skies above Königsberg in 1698 would reappear at a speciﬁc 
           date. One evening in the icy winter of 1744, Knutzen invited Kant 
           and some fellow students to his house to gaze through the mirror 
           telescope he had made according to Sir Isaac Newton’s own design. 
           There Kant could see with his own eyes the astonishing power of 
           Newton’s theories as the telescope revealed the stunning tale of a 
           comet  splashed  across  the  night  sky.  As  it  turned  out,  Knutzen’s 
           numbers were o7, and the comet of 1744 was not the same as that 
           of  1698.  But  even  this  realization  failed  to  dim  Kant’s  newborn 
           enthusiasm for the ability of reason to grasp the laws that govern 
           the cosmos.20
              Knutzen’s  faith  in  the  power  of  human  knowledge  to  derive 
           objective laws from observations followed largely in the footsteps 
           of  the  seventeenth- century German  polymath  Gottfried  Wilhelm 
           Leibniz, who shares credit (or blame, if you happen to be a junior in 
           high school) with Newton for creating calculus, and even invented 
           the  ﬁrst  mechanical  calculator,  a  forebear  of  modern  computers. 
           For  Leibniz  and  the  rationalist  schools  that  followed  him, things 
           appeared and behaved as they did because they were programmed 
           to do so, and the programmer who determined their behavior was, 
           naturally, God.
              For Leibniz’s adherents everything that exists and moves in the 
           world does so because God has an idea of it existing and moving. 
           Instead  of  wondering  if  Newton’s  laws  have  objective  truth  and 
           stand for all time and, if so, why they work the way they do, rational-
           ists could have faith that those laws accurately described the interac-
           tions between all elements in space-time,  because God controlled 
           all movements for all time through what Leibniz called “preestab-
           lished harmony.” Every single item in creation just needed to follow 
           its own preset path through space- time. When a comet comes back 
           around in agreement with calculations made with Newton’s equa-
           tions for gravity, we don’t need to account for the planets’ action 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   11                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           12              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           on it. Indeed, the planets don’t need to communicate anything to 
           the comet; each is just ﬂowing along the path of its preestablished 
           harmony.
             In 1770, Kant assumed the position of Full Professor of Logic 
           and Metaphysics at the University of Königsberg. Though he had 
           (by and large) toed the rationalist line of believing in a fundamental 
           continuity between the way the world is in itself— the code of the 
           world— and how it manifests itself to human senses, Kant had never 
           been a party-line  man. As he wrote about his method in a letter two 
           years earlier to the famed poet and philosopher Johann Gottfried 
           Herder, “With a deep indi7erence toward my own opinions as well 
           as those of others, I o.en subvert the entire structure and consider 
           it from several points of view in order to hit ﬁnally perhaps on the 
           position  from  which  I  can  hope  to  draw  the  system  truthfully.”21 
           Upon assuming his professorship, Kant delivered an inaugural dis-
           sertation in Latin, as was customary. True to his word, he used the 
           occasion to entirely subvert the structure.
             For the rationalists, space and time were fundamental parts of 
           reality. Until as late as 1768, Kant accepted this premise.22 The inau-
           gural  dissertation  hinted  at  Kant’s  shake-up  of  this  notion  right 
           from its title, On the Form and Principles of the Sensible and Intelligible 
           World. In his lecture, Kant rejected the notion that our senses directly 
           express an underlying set of divine ideas or instructions— that we 
           can read the code of the world, as it were. In its place he now drew 
           an airtight border between what we experience with our senses in 
           space and time, on the one hand, and eternal truths and principles, 
           on the other, which exist outside space and time and remain true 
           despite what our senses tell us.
             In advancing this distinction, Kant did not, however, abandon 
           the hope that we could derive objective truths about the causal con-
           nections between our perceptions, even as they remained subjective 
           and variable. In other words, while we can only know what we learn 
           through our senses, he still thought we could infer from our senses 
           certain objective facts about the world, such as the relation between 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   12                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    13

           a cause and the e7ect that must follow that cause. But something 
           happened in July 1771 that would decisively challenge that hope 
           and lead Kant onto a new course of thought.
              That summer a local newspaper published an anonymous essay 
           under the title “Night Thoughts of a Skeptic.” Based on its style and 
           philosophical  tone, many  readers  assumed  that  Kant’s  friend  and 
           frequent correspondent Johann Georg Hamann had written it. In 
           this  brief  text, a  skeptical  soliloquist  pushes  his  inquiries  to  their 
           most devastating conclusions. Not only is every single observation 
           we make subject to the vagaries of our subjective condition, but also 
           any principle we attempt to draw from them, such as the existence 
           of an objective causal relation between them, “lies merely in our-
           selves” and is “nothing but a determination of the mind.”23 Thus, the 
           writer concludes, “when we say we desire to know the ultimate and 
           operating principle,” that is, when we attempt to grasp the objective 
           reality underlying our observations, “we either contradict ourselves, 
           or  talk  without  a  meaning.”24  There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  law  of 
           nature; we are trapped forever in our subjective impressions, and 
           believing otherwise is pure delusion.
              According  to  the  insomniac  skeptic’s  provocations,  both  the 
           spatial and temporal media in which all causal relations take place 
           and the very fact of causality itself are nothing other than aspects 
           of the subjective framework we use to make sense of the world. For 
           Hamann,  thinkers  were  going  too  far  when  they  tried  to  expand 
           knowledge with their reason alone. This philosophical hubris could 
           only ever lead to error and despair. We need not more philosophi-
           cal rigor but faith. Where human reason failed and had to fail, only 
           faith  could  step  back  in  and  provide  the  grounds  for  our  beliefs. 
           Hamann had intended this text as a cautionary note. Moreover, he 
           intended its message to be read by Kant.
              Kant did indeed read “Night Thoughts of a Skeptic” that summer. 
           But he did not take the conclusion from it that Hamann had hoped 
           he would. Rather than give up on the possibility of accessing some 
           grounds  for  objective  knowledge  of  the  world,  rather  than  agree 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   13                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           14              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           that such knowledge had to give way to faith, Kant realized that he 
           had not been radical enough in his analysis of what happens when 
           we observe something— even if it would take him another decade 
           (and almost nine hundred pages) to turn that realization into the 
           “all- crushing” Critique of Pure Reason.25 At the same time, Kant real-
           ized something else. Hamann had not authored the morose essay 
           that had awoken him from his slumber; he had translated it. “Night 
           Thoughts of a Skeptic” was nothing other than the conclusion to 
           David  Hume’s Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  And  in  that  great  book, 
           Hume had gone beyond questioning our ability to learn objective 
           truths about causality to doubt even the existence of the self trying 
           to grasp those truths.
             In his Treatise, Hume followed in the footsteps of René Descartes 
           and  plumbed  the  depths  of  what  he  could  know.  But  instead  of 
           landing on the sure footing of “I think” as the great French thinker 
           had, Hume encountered only baseless impressions: “When I enter 
           most intimately into what I call myself, I always stumble on some 
           particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love 
           or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never catch myself at any time without 
           a perception, and never can observe anything but the perception.”26 
           Like Knutzen staring into the heavens and mistaking the comet he 
           sees there for the one he expected to ﬁnd, when we believe that our 
           impressions belong to a self, we falsely project an expected unity on 
           a disjointed and random series of impressions.
             Hume’s conviction that there was no substance connecting his 
           disparate experiences, no res cogitans, or “thinking stu7,” as Descartes 
           had memorably coined the self, le. him, as he wrote, “in the most 
           deplorable condition imaginable, inviron’d with the deepest dark-
           ness.”27 Like Borges and Unamuno, Hume had found his hell, not 
           in the threat of eternal damnation, but in the suspicion that there 
           was no damned self in the ﬁrst place. But faced with the challenge 
           of  Hume’s  hell,  Kant  discovered  a  profound  truth  about  the  self 
           that Hume had overlooked—the  very same truth Borges discovered 
           when, a century and a half later, he used his newfound style of writ-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   14                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    15

           ing  to  push  to  its  limits  the  very  idea  of  what  it  means  to  know 
           reality.


           +%12&  +& %";& #' proof  that  Borges  read  about  Shereshevsky’s 
           memory feats in the 1930s, we do know that he read ravenously and 
           at times indiscriminately, and that stories about the mnemonist daz-
           zling Russian audiences had circulated widely at the time. In any 
           event, the similarities are remarkable. In Borges’s story, he recounts 
           meeting a young man in the provinces named Ireneo Funes, already 
           well known by his fellow villagers for his quirky ability to tell the 
           exact  time  of  day  without  ever  checking  a  watch.  When  Borges 
           returns to the town two years a.er encountering Ireneo, he learns 
           that a terrible accident has befallen him. Ireneo fell from his horse 
           and  injured  his  head  and  is  now  conﬁned  to  his  house.  Seeking 
           him out on the outskirts of town, Borges ﬁnds the young man lying 
           alone on his cot, smoking a cigarette at the far end of a dark room.
              The  injury  changed  Funes  in  a  remarkable  way. Where  before 
           he  evinced  an  unusual  awareness  of  the  passage  of  time,  he  now 
           possesses  a  memory  so  perfect  it  seems  to  eradicate  time.  On  his 
           prior visit Borges had lent Funes a Latin dictionary and his copy 
           of Pliny’s Naturalis historia. Now, as Borges steps into the dimly lit 
           room, he hears Funes reciting by heart “the ﬁrst paragraph of the 
           twenty- fourth chapter of the seventh book of Pliny’s Naturalis histo-
           ria,” the subject of which is memory. But more than a perfect recall 
           of past words or events, Ireneo Funes perceives everything that he 
           has experienced or is currently experiencing, and does so in perfect, 
           saturated, sensory plenitude. As Borges describes it,

              With one quick look, you and I perceive three wineglasses on 
              a table; Funes perceived every grape that had been pressed into 
              the wine and all the stalks and tendrils of its vineyard. He knew 
              the forms of the clouds in the southern sky on the morning of 
              April 30, 1882, and he could compare them in his memory with 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   15                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           16              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             the veins in the marbled binding of a book he had seen only 
             once, or with the feathers of spray li.ed by an oar on the Río 
             Negro on the eve of the Battle of Quebracho. Nor were those 
             memories simple— every visual image was linked to muscular 
             sensations, thermal sensations, and so on. He was able to recon-
             struct  every  dream,  every  daydream  he  had  ever  had.  Two  or 
             three  times  he  had  reconstructed  an  entire  day;  he  had  never 
             once erred or faltered, but each reconstruction had itself taken 
             an entire day.28

             Funes insists he has a gi. beyond all reckoning, but like Luria 
           analyzing Shereshevsky, Borges quickly realizes he also has an a>ic-
           tion. Like Shereshevsky, Funes bathes in the immediacy of his mem-
           ories; he ﬁnds it di<cult to experience the world precisely because 
           he inhabits it so intensely. If reconstructing a daylong memory takes 
           an  entire  day,  that  new  day  is  consequently  lost  to  the  man  who 
           must wall himself into the sensory deprivation tank of his room so 
           as not to be consumed by the present.
             As for Shereshevsky, language for Funes doesn’t seem to func-
           tion properly, or at least the way it does for most human beings. 
           Instead of understanding numbers as elements in a system of gen-
           eral applicability, Funes, like Shereshevsky, has an individual name 
           and identity for every number he encounters. By the time he meets 
           with Borges, these have surpassed twenty-four  thousand. “Instead of 
           seven thousand thirteen (7013), he would say, for instance, ‘Máximo 
           Pérez’;  instead  of  seven  thousand  fourteen  (7014),  ‘the  railroad’; 
           other  numbers  were ‘Luis  Melián  Laﬁnur,’ ‘Olimar,’ ‘sulfur,’ ‘clubs,’ 
           ‘the whale,’ ‘gas,’ ‘a stewpot,’ ‘Napoleon,’ ‘Agustín de Vedia.’ Instead of 
           ﬁve hundred (500), he said ‘nine.’ ”29
             A language such as the one the English philosopher John Locke 
           postulated  in  the  seventeenth  century,  one  with  a  term  for  every 
           being in existence, might have satisﬁed Funes. But if Locke rejected 
           the idea for being so speciﬁc as to be useless, Funes rejected it for 
           being far too general. Funes, Borges soon realized, lacked the basic 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   16                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    17

           function  that  permits  us  to  think  in  the  ﬁrst  place— abstraction. 
           “Not only was it di<cult for him to see that the generic symbol 
           ‘dog’ took in all the dissimilar individuals of all shapes and sizes,” 
           Borges recounts, “it irritated him that the ‘dog’ of three-fourteen  in 
           the a.ernoon, seen in proﬁle, should be indicated by the same noun 
           as the dog of three- ﬁ.een, seen frontally. His own face in the mirror, 
           his own hands, surprised him every time he saw them.”30
              Funes, it seems, su7ers from an incapacity to make connections 
           between even slightly distinct experiences, just as Shereshevsky did, 
           and they both exhibit the same impatience with the generality of 
           language. And yet a lurking paradox haunts both accounts. Shere-
           shevsky claimed that he struggled to grasp that “the word ekipazh,” 
           which “deﬁnitely has to be a cab, can also mean the crew of a ship.”31 
           But  for  Shereshevsky  to  complain  about  his  inability  to  compre-
           hend the generality of language, he must comprehend the gener-
           ality  of  language. He  needs  to  see  that  a  word  refers  to  two  di!erent 
           experiences in order to ﬁnd it inadequate that it does so.
              Likewise, for Funes, each and every impression is so vastly, over-
           whelmingly speciﬁc that he becomes “irritated” that we use the same 
           word for a dog seen in two di7erent moments; he is “surprised” each 
           time he glimpses his image in a mirror. And yet, despite the power 
           and inextricability of both his memory and his absorption into the 
           sensory  world,  Funes  demonstrably  does  span  their  di7erences. 
           Indeed, for him to have enough self-awareness  to feel irritation at 
           our sloppy use of a word, or surprise at his own face, he must have 
           the power, even if only in the slightest manner, to overlook the dis-
           tinctions that make each unique. And this minimal forgetting, this 
           minimum distance from a total absorption in the present, also cre-
           ates the minimal condition of having a self in the ﬁrst place.
              Funes remembers “not only every leaf of every tree in every patch 
           of forest, but every time he had perceived or imagined that leaf.”32 
           For  him,  each  iota  of  the  space- time continuum  is  utterly  singu-
           lar. Or so he claims. Hume also claimed this. For Hume, we could 
           never know if there was a world of information, of necessary laws 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   17                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           18              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           behind our sensory impressions. For him, each impression, each leaf 
           in a garden, was condemned to be isolated, sui generis, and never 
           an example of a general rule. But where this challenge led him to 
           extreme skepticism, Kant drew another lesson.
             Kant  realized  that  Hume’s  world  of  pure,  unique  impressions 
           couldn’t exist. This is because the minimal requirement for experi-
           encing anything is not to be so absorbed in the present that one is 
           lost in it. What Hume had claimed—that  when exploring his feel-
           ing of sel=ood, he always landed “on some particular perception or 
           other” but could never catch himself “at any time without a percep-
           tion, and never can observe anything but the perception”—was  sim-
           ply not true.33 Because for Hume to even report this feeling he had 
           to  perceive  something  in  addition  to  the  immediate  perceptions, 
           namely, the very ﬂow of time that allowed them to be distinct in the 
           ﬁrst place. And to recognize time passing is necessarily to recognize 
           that you are embedded in the perception.
             Hence what Kant wrote in his answer to Hamann, ten years in the 
           making. To recollect perfectly eradicates the recollection, just as to 
           perceive perfectly eradicates the perception. For the one who recalls 
           or perceives must recognize him or herself along with the memory 
           or perception for the memory or impression to exist at all. If every-
           thing we learn about the world ﬂows directly into us from utterly 
           distinct bits of code, as the rationalists thought, or if everything we 
           learn remains nothing but subjective, unconnected impressions, as 
           Hume believed— it comes down to exactly the same thing. With no 
           self to distinguish itself, no self to bridge two disparate moments in 
           space- time, there is simply no one there to feel irritated at the inad-
           equacy of “dog.” No experience whatsoever is possible.
             Here is how Kant put it in his Critique of Pure Reason. Whatever 
           we think or perceive can register as a thought or perception only 
           if it causes a change in us, a “modiﬁcation of the mind.” But these 
           changes would not register at all if we did not connect them across 
           time, “for as contained in one moment no representation can ever be 
           anything other than absolute unity.”34 As contained in one moment. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   18                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    19

           Think of experiencing a ﬂow of events as a bit like watching a ﬁlm. 
           For something to be happening at all, the viewer makes a connec-
           tion between each frame of the ﬁlm, spanning the small di7erences 
           so as to create the experience of movement. But if there is a com-
           pletely new viewer for every frame, with no relation at all to the 
           prior or subsequent frame, then all that remains is an absolute unity. 
           But such a unity, which is exactly what Funes and Shereshevsky and 
           Hume  claimed  they  could  experience,  utterly  negates  perceiving 
           anything at all, since all perception requires bridging impressions 
           over time. In other words, it requires exactly what a truly perfect 
           memory, a truly perfect perception, or a truly perfect observation 
           absolutely  denies:  overlooking  minor  di7erences  enough  to  be  a 
           self, a unity spanning distinct moments in time.
              As Borges would show throughout his writings, the very obscu-
           rity  of  words  that  had  seemed  to  him  a  betrayal  of  their  poetic 
           promise could, wielded the right way, procure a di7erent salvation. 
           The self was not nothing. It couldn’t be. The very impossibility of 
           recovering a scene from the past, of recapturing the ﬂow of an a.er-
           noon in life, guarantees that self’s persistence. But he also grasped 
           something else. Like Kant before him, he also discovered that the 
           conceit of slowing time down to a single frame, honing the moment 
           of an observation to a pure present, destroys the observation itself. 
           The closer we look, the more the present vanishes from our grasp.
              Which  was  precisely  the  insight  that  hit  Werner  Heisenberg 
           in Copenhagen as he walked in Faelled Park on that cold winter 
           evening.


           3'- "22 1$* 3"9'0*2, impenetrable equations, the central debate 
           in quantum mechanics today is not so much about mathematics as 
           it is about language. Discoveries about the building blocks of real-
           ity can’t help but invite philosophical speculation, and while there 
           also exists a ﬁeld of philosophy devoted to it, physicists are far from 
           immune to the temptations of ontology.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   19                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           20              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             Currently  most  particle  physicists,  along  with  the  grants  and 
           positions  that  make  their  work  possible,  accept  some  version  of 
           what has come to be known as the Copenhagen interpretation of 
           quantum mechanics. The Copenhagen interpretation takes its name 
           from  the  city  in  which  Niels  Bohr  and  Werner Heisenberg  even-
           tually worked out their di7erences and arrived at a description of 
           the relation between what Heisenberg’s equations told them and 
           the reality we live in on a daily basis. The core of the interpretation 
           contains a compromise between Heisenberg’s discovery and Bohr’s 
           interpretive framework.
             Heisenberg’s principle shows that the closer you home in on the 
           location of a particle, the less you know about its momentum, that 
           is, where it is heading and how fast it’s going there. Or, conversely, 
           you can ﬁnd out a great deal about its momentum, but to do so, 
           you lose all sense of where it is. It’s like ﬁnding exactly where Lind-
           bergh’s plane is over the Atlantic, but only at the cost of knowing 
           nothing about the path he is ﬂying. What you can do, though, is 
           use Heisenberg’s matrix algebra— or what ultimately won the scien-
           tiﬁc community over, Erwin Schrödinger’s wave equation— to enter 
           measurements for either position or momentum and produce reli-
           able predictions of the probable outcomes of future measurements.
             Bohr’s addition is a kind of philosophical explanation of why 
           that is the case. We can think of matter and energy as either a particle 
           or a wave. These descriptions complement each other, but neither 
           one stands on its own. Likewise, quantum mechanics and classical 
           mechanics apply to separate but complementary realms. Classical 
           mechanics  can  translate  into  quantum  mechanics,  but  the  image 
           the former gives of objects moving in space just doesn’t apply to the 
           quantum realm.
             Critics  of  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  reasonably  ask  what 
           determines at exactly which point the laws of classical physics that 
           work  so  well  for  baseballs,  airplanes,  and  planets  simply  cease  to 
           hold for smaller entities. The same critics tend to grouse that Bohr 
           and company made a practice of moving the border between the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   20                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    21

           quantum and the classical realms whenever it seemed convenient 
           to do so.
              Most do agree, however, that within the ﬁeld of quantum phys-
           ics  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  has  become  something  of  an 
           orthodoxy, with the potentially chilling e7ect that young research-
           ers interested in working on the problem of “what actually is hap-
           pening” at the quantum level run into an institutional inertia best 
           characterized by the Cornell physicist David Mermin’s quip “Shut 
           up and calculate.”35 (Einstein found this attitude particularly exas-
           perating, to the point that he would ask Copenhagen adherents if 
           they also believed the moon ceased to exist when it wasn’t being 
           observed; Mermin, to his credit, is consistent enough to insist that 
           “the moon is demonstrably not there when nobody looks.”)36
              Despite this general dominance of the Copenhagen interpreta-
           tion, alternatives continue to sprout, each with its vocal advocates. 
           Some of those alternatives, which can trace themselves back to Ein-
           stein and Schrödinger’s realism, are collectively referred to as objec-
           tive  collapse  models— brieﬂy,  models  that  don’t  require  a  human 
           observer for probability waves to collapse into a single particle with 
           a deﬁnite location. The Italian physicist Angelo Bassi, a leading pro-
           ponent of one such model, believes that quantum mechanics can 
           be  understood  to  describe  reality  as  well  as  predict  it, if  only  we 
           change our language. “You should remove the word ‘particle’ from 
           your vocabulary,” as he puts it. “It’s all about gelatin. An electron can 
           be here and there and that’s it.” In Bassi’s view, this gelatinous sub-
           strate of reality reacts to encountering other such inchoate beings by 
           snapping into a particle form, “like an octopus that when you touch 
           them: Whoop!”37 Crucially, this happens whether or not the inchoate 
           blob it encounters happens to belong to a human observer.
              If we can hear in proponents of the Copenhagen interpretation 
           echoes  of  the  philosopher  Ludwig  Wittgenstein,  who  famously 
           wrote, “Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent,” Bassi 
           and those following in Einstein and Schrödinger’s footsteps insist 
           that a theory we can’t explain in words, no matter how excellent 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   21                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           22              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           at  predicting  results,  ultimately  isn’t  a  theory.38  As  Bassi  avers, “I 
           strongly believe that physics is words.”39
             But what does it mean to put something into words? Of all the 
           physicists responsible for developing quantum mechanics, Werner 
           Heisenberg evinced the least concern with making the results of his 
           and his colleagues’ new discoveries conform to preexisting images of 
           reality. His nonchalance about what reality ultimately looks like was 
           interpreted by his colleagues as a lack of interest in “philosophical” 
           questions. Yet Heisenberg spent decades lecturing and writing for 
           the public on the philosophical implications of quantum physics.
             In 1942, with the world engulfed in war and himself at the head 
           of  Germany’s  nuclear  research  program,  Heisenberg  was  secretly 
           writing a book. The “Manuscript of 1942,” as it would be referred to 
           for years, didn’t appear until a.er Heisenberg’s death in 1976, and 
           wasn’t translated until a version appeared in France in the 1980s. It 
           turns out that during the time Heisenberg worked on creating a ﬁs-
           sion reactor for Germany, he quietly obsessed about the question of 
           how accurately humans could come to know reality. The key to this 
           question, he believed, lay in our understanding of language.
             As Heisenberg describes the basic problem in his 1942 manu-
           script,  science  translates  reality  into  thought,  and  humans  need 
           language to think. Language, however, su7ers from the same fun-
           damental  limitation  that  Heisenberg  discovered  in  nature.  We 
           can focus our language down to highly objective degrees, where it 
           becomes  particularly  well  deﬁned  and  hence  useful  for  scientists 
           studying the natural world. But to the extent we do so, we neces-
           sarily lose another essential aspect of words, namely, their ability to 
           have multiple meanings depending on how we use them.
             The ﬁrst nature of language Heisenberg calls static, and the sec-
           ond,  dynamic.  While  all  humans  use  language  at  varying  points 
           along these spectrums, physicists exemplify the static use, while poets 
           exemplify the dynamic use. Where scientists very much depend on 
           the static quality of words for their ability to pin down exact descrip-
           tions of their objects of study, they do so at a cost: “What is sacriﬁced 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   22                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    23

           in ‘static’ description is that inﬁnitely complex association among 
           words and concepts without which we would lack any sense at all 
           that we have understood anything of the inﬁnite abundance of real-
           ity.”40 As a result, precisely insofar as perceiving and thinking about 
           the world depend on coordinating both aspects of language, a “com-
           plete and exact depiction of reality can never be achieved.”41
              It’s hard not to hear in Heisenberg’s discussion echoes of Sol-
           omon  Shereshevsky’s  own  struggles  with  language,  or  his  more 
           perfect  avatar  Funes’s  struggles  with  perception  itself.  It  is  as  if 
           Shereshevsky and Funes had become test cases for a sort of internal 
           check on human knowledge, whereby the perfection of their recall 
           and the intensity of their living in the present became a hindrance 
           to understanding language or distinguishing perceptions from rec-
           ollections.  Imagine  Funes  as  the  scientist  in  this  scenario.  Funes 
           distinguishes everything. He perceives everything as completely sui 
           generis, not related to anything else. This utter perfection of percep-
           tion allows him to distinguish “not only every leaf of every tree in 
           every patch of forest, but every time he had perceived or imagined 
           that leaf.” Put him in a laboratory, give him a cloud chamber, and he 
           perceives not only every line of condensation le. by an errant parti-
           cle but the particle itself; not only every particle, but every moment 
           in the series of moments that deﬁnes that particle’s trajectory.
              But of course, he can’t. Not because of some otherworldly qual-
           ity of the particle—that  it ceases to exist over the Atlantic and magi-
           cally appears when sighted over France. The scientist can’t perceive 
           the way Funes ostensibly can because the very nature of observing 
           something as it changes over time requires that the observer gen-
           eralize,  ever  so  slightly,  and  connect  the  di7erence  between  two 
           moments in space- time. Without this slight blur, this ever so subtle 
           distancing, this li.ing up and holding steady of a standard so as to 
           register some inﬁnitesimal alteration, all there would be is an eter-
           nal present. The dog of three ﬁ.een, seen frontally, never to be called 
           a dog, never to be recognized, never to be observed in the ﬁrst place.
              Like Borges and Kant, what Heisenberg grasped—what  he cal-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   23                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           24              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           culated mathematically, yes, but also what he was able to capture in 
           language— was  that  to  simultaneously  observe  an  electron’s  posi-
           tion and momentum would require a perfect presence in a single 
           moment  in  time,  which  is  utterly  incompatible  with  the  mini-
           mum condition of observing anything at all. Not because of some 
           spooky quality of the world of fundamental materials, but because, 
           by its very nature, an observation must relate at least two distinct 
           moments in space- time. In Kant’s words, an observation absolutely 
           requires distinguishing “the time in the succession of impressions 
           on  one  another.”42  An  observation,  any  observation,  undermines 
           perfect being in the present, because the observation itself brings 
           space and time to the picture. A fundamental particle captured in a 
           singular moment of space- time is thus, by deﬁnition, unperceivable 
           and “absolute unity,” an inﬁnitely thin sliver of space-time,  with no 
           before or a.er.43


           "* )"#$ +&#$ '# to tell Herder in his letter from 1767, his method 
           of subverting the structure and considering it from various points 
           of view had led him to “recognize the inherent determinations and 
           limitations of human abilities and inclinations” and to isolate and 
           understand such limits as they a7ected knowledge itself.44 Not to 
           condemn science to the hopelessness that drove Hume to despair, 
           though. Kant thought recognizing and exactly describing those lim-
           its could ensure that science not run into limits of its own making. 
           Heisenberg felt the same. As he wrote in his 1942 manuscript, each 
           time science makes a new discovery, its “sphere of validity appears to 
           be pushed yet one more step into an impenetrable darkness that lies 
           behind the ideas language is able to express. This feeling determines 
           the direction of our thinking, but part of the essence of thinking 
           is that the complex relationship it seeks to explore cannot be con-
           tained in words.” We need to guard against, to be aware of, not a bar-
           rier out there in the world, an impenetrable wall that science will 
           eventually run up against. Rather, we should guard against creating 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   24                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                  Unforgettable                    25

           that  wall  ourselves  by  imposing  a  prejudice  we  have  about  what 
           reality must be like onto the perpetually receding future of our dis-
           coveries.  In  Heisenberg’s  words, “The  ability  of  human  beings  to 
           understand is without limit. About the ultimate things we cannot 
           speak.”45 Or to put it inversely, by presuming we know the ultimate 
           nature of reality, we limit our ability to understand.
              In  expressing  this  attitude,  Heisenberg  was  paying  homage  to 
           Kant, who had led the way in discovering that the key to advancing 
           science lay in not blinding our vision with the presumption of ulti-
           mate knowledge. To get there, though, Kant ﬁrst had to dive deeply 
           into the nature of space and time; to tease apart with his intellect 
           what the physicists of Heisenberg’s day would start to discover with 
           the beneﬁts of cloud chambers and spectrographic analysis; to come 
           face to face with that paradoxical moment when one sliver of space- 
           time changes into another.
              Kant didn’t make this discovery on his own. An entire history of 
           thought preceded him, and as much as he gleaned from the science 
           and cosmology of his day, his philosophical roots pulled deeply from 
           that history. In the next chapter we will go back to Kant’s early life 
           and education to trace those inﬂuences as his star rose among the 
           thinkers of the eighteenth century. We will see how his most radical 
           insight, the one that set him on the road to revolutionizing philoso-
           phy, involved how we conceive of space and time and their relation 
           to reality. And we will see how he started to trace the contours of the 
           crevice of unreason that emerges when we imagine that the tools we 
           use to understand the world are of the world themselves.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   25                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                      2

                          A BRIEF HISTORY              
                     OF THIS VERY INSTANT


                  # #';&9(&- 4,  4?@@, $%& city of Lisbon was leveled by 
                  a  series  of  devastating  earthquakes,  leaving  tens  of  thou-
          Osands dead. The e7ect was felt far and wide—not    only in 
           the waves that emanated out through the earth’s mantle, but in the 
           questions the event raised for those trying to understand the nature 
           of our planet and its place in the universe. Kant had been caught 
           in  the  gravitational  pull  of  such  massive  questions  ever  since  his 
           mother, full of religious fervor, had taken him by the hand and led 
           him outside to gaze up and marvel at the beauty of God’s starlit tap-
           estry spread above them in the night sky.1 That same night sky was 
           later the stage for Martin Knutzen’s revelation to Kant of how math-
           ematics could decode the movements of distant objects. But Knut-
           zen  had  succumbed  to  exhaustion  in  1751,  and  his  professorship 
           had lain dormant ever since. Now Kant felt the need to rise to his 
           former teacher’s calling. He penned a series of widely read essays for 
           a Königsberg weekly on the relationship between the earth’s rota-
           tion and disruptions on its surface, speculating about the possibility 
           of using science to predict such disasters as had befallen Lisbon.2


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   26                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       27

              Clearly, at least in Königsberg’s academic world, Kant was mak-
           ing waves of his own— curious, given how little he had published. 
           His only book, a work on physics and cosmology called Universal 
           Natural  History  and  Theory  of  the  Heavens— inspired  by  a  love  for 
           astronomy that dated to his studies with Knutzen and his marvel-
           ous  comet— had failed  to  reach  the  public  due  to  the  untimely 
           bankruptcy of its publisher. Despite its lack of inﬂuence, he would 
           attempt to use it the following year to position himself as the natu-
           ral replacement for Knutzen’s open professorship. In a letter to King 
           Frederick II, he presented his book as a calling card and beseeched 
           the  king  to  look  favorably  on  his  application,  emphasizing  his 
           “utmost submission” to his sovereign’s authority and signing o7 as 
           the king’s “most devoted servant.”3 Unfortunately, the king ignored 
           his letter; for ﬁnancial reasons, the university decided to leave Knut-
           zen’s chair unﬁlled.
              Despite  this  dearth  of  written  work,  when  Kant  defended  the 
           dissertation  for  his  master’s  degree  in  June  1755,  the  event  was 
           attended by a large crowd of the city’s most revered men of letters, 
           who “revealed their respect by the exceptional hush and attentive-
           ness” with which they attended to his words.4 Later that year, Kant 
           stepped  gingerly  into  the  spacious  hall  of  the  professor’s  house 
           where he resided to give his ﬁrst public lecture. In order to access 
           the room, he had to push his way through throngs of students who 
           had gathered for the event, milling about in the hall and overﬂow-
           ing  into  the  entrance  and  even  onto  the  building’s  front  steps, 
           which were “packed with an almost incredible crowd of students.”5 
           The sudden limelight clearly frayed the young teacher’s nerves, for 
           he lost his accustomed composure and stumbled through his lec-
           ture,  frequently  correcting  himself.  Despite  his  nervousness,  the 
           lecture was a resounding success. The audience reported “an even 
           more lively warmth” than they had been given to expect based on 
           the growing reputation of Kant’s “most comprehensive erudition.”6 
           In  fact,  Kant’s  reputation  derived  mostly  from  conversations.  As 
           friends of his would later report, Kant was a man who in the course 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   27                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           28              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           of a normal discussion “threw o7 ingenious ideas by the thousands” 
           and who, in his discourse and lectures, “was far more genial than in 
           his books.”7
             Kant’s rapid rise to prominence as a teacher and thinker at the 
           vanguard of a philosophical movement dedicated to reason and sci-
           ence  belied  his  humble  origins  as  the  fourth  of  nine  children  in 
           a family of a harness maker. Touchingly, throughout his life Kant 
           always  esteemed  and  extolled  his  parents  for  their  dedication  to 
           Pietism— a sect  of  Lutheranism  that  stressed  prayer,  humility,  a 
           personal relation to God, and biblical literalism. He praised their 
           simple dedication to work and the fortitude with which they faced 
           life’s vicissitudes, a quality he attributed to their religious belief. “Say 
           what you want about Pietism,” he related once to his former student 
           and eventual biographer Friedrich Theodor Rink, “the people who 
           were serious about it were outstanding in a praiseworthy respect. 
           They possessed the highest thing men can possess, that calm, that 
           serenity, that inner peace, undisturbed by any passion.”8
             Kant was far less rosy- eyed, however, when discussing his educa-
           tion. When  he  was  eight  years  old, a  client  of  his  father’s  named 
           Franz Albert Schultz, who led a Bible discussion group faithfully 
           attended by Kant’s mother, noticed the child who hung on her hand 
           at his evening Bible study group and was struck by the otherworldly 
           intelligence that emanated from his eyes.9 On his recommendation 
           young Immanuel began to attend school at the Collegium Frideri-
           cianum, which Schultz would later come to direct and which taught 
           a stark curriculum entirely in Latin, devoid of any scientiﬁc content. 
           To be there in time, the boy would have to rise each morning before 
           dawn, o.en in the winter cold— a habit he would maintain for the 
           rest of his life even while never losing his dislike of it.
             Kant hated his schooling, speaking of it as a form of “child slav-
           ery,”10 and regarded its focus on prayer, its dissection of interior life 
           in search of sin, and its dedication to outward shows of piety and 
           virtue as prime examples of “the mental disorder of alleged super-
           natural inspirations . . . illuminatism or terrorism.”11 Indeed, much 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   28                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       29

           in the spirit of the Enlightenment, of which he would become one 
           of the most inﬂuential proponents in his later life, Kant ridiculed 
           superstitious thinking and practice in all of its forms. As he wrote 
           to a friend at the time, he felt it unlikely that anyone ever noticed 
           in him “any trace of a way of thinking inclined to the miraculous or 
           a weakness that could lead to credulity.”12 All the more surprising, 
           then, that in 1764, having ﬁnally won the attention and admiration 
           of the literary and intellectual world with some far- ranging essays 
           on new advances in science, rational theology, and moral philoso-
           phy, Kant would turn his attention to ghosts.
              The  spirits  in  question  were  those  purported  to  be  in  com-
           munion with Emanuel Swedenborg, a Swedish theologian whose 
           books  detailing  his  visions,  mystical  encounters,  and  prophecies 
           were  becoming  best  sellers  throughout  Europe. What  made  Swe-
           denborg’s approach distinct was his claim that his insights stemmed 
           from his personal encounters with human souls a.er their death, 
           encounters that served as the basis of remarkably detailed descrip-
           tions of the spirit world. As he wrote in his best-known  book, Heaven 
           and Hell, when men die, they are divided by God into groups accord-
           ing to their virtue; however, “though they are thus divided, still they 
           who have been friends and acquaintances in the life of the body, all 
           meet and converse together, when they desire it, especially wives and 
           husbands and brothers and sisters.”13 He then warrants this remark 
           with his personal testimony: “I have seen a father speak with six sons 
           and recognize them and I have seen many others with their relatives 
           and friends, who, however, because they were of diverse dispositions, 
           from their life in the world, were soon separated.”14
              The popularity of his works was also based on reports circulat-
           ing of Swedenborg’s miraculous ability to know and describe events 
           occurring, for example, in the city of Stockholm when he was more 
           than ﬁ.y miles away from the scene himself— reports that, if they 
           were  true,  would  violate  the  scientiﬁc  laws  that  Kant  had  spent 
           his  career  learning  and  teaching.  Most  troubling,  the  testimonies 
           avowing the truth of Swedenborg’s prediction were coming from 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   29                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           30              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           sources that Kant felt to be trustworthy. But if Swedenborg was to 
           be believed, it would mean that a mere human being had been able 
           to experience and then communicate about a completely di7erent 
           world from the temporal one we inhabit, a world presumably popu-
           lated by eternal, spiritual beings not conﬁned to a local place and 
           a  limited  timeline.  His  parents’ pietistic  faith  had  certainly  made 
           them try to instill in him a belief in eternal truths that transcended 
           the mundane world in space and time, but such truths pertained 
           to  God,  not  a  mere  mortal  like  Swedenborg.  Kant  felt  he  had  to 
           investigate.
             Though he put considerable time and exertion into the exercise 
           of reading and reviewing Swedenborg’s published works, Kant was 
           clearly somewhat embarrassed by the endeavor. He published his 
           book, Dreams of a Spirit- Seer, anonymously in 1766, but soon found 
           himself apologetically acknowledging his authorship in a letter to 
           the renowned Jewish philosopher Moses Mendelssohn shortly a.er 
           learning of Mendelssohn’s critical reaction. As he wrote to him, “The 
           estrangement you express about the tone of my little work proves 
           to me that you have formed a good opinion of the sincerity of my 
           character,  and  your  very  reluctance  to  see  that  character  ambigu-
           ously expressed is both precious and pleasing to me.”15
             It appears that the tone Mendelssohn found so unﬁtting was noth-
           ing other than dripping sarcasm. Reading the body of Swedenborg’s 
           work had so riled Kant that he had dropped his normally objective 
           style and replaced it with one we might charitably describe as earthy. 
           Indeed, Kant’s conclusion starts by implying mental instability as 
           the  cause  of  Swedenborg’s  visions— “I do  not  blame  the  reader, 
           if,  instead  of  regarding  the  spirit-seers   as  half- dwellers  in  another 
           world, he, without further ceremony, dispatches them as candidates 
           for the hospital, and thereby spares himself further investigation”— 
           but  ultimately  stoops  to  the  scatological:  “If  a  hypochondriacal 
           wind should rage in the guts, what matters is the direction it takes: 
           if downwards, then the result is a fart; if upwards, an apparition or 
           a heavenly inspiration.”16 Kant, it appears, had taken some o7ense at 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   30                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       31

           Swedenborg’s pretension that he could directly access the spiritual 
           world.
              In the years that followed, Kant’s voracious intellectual appetite 
           would focus ever more on fundamental questions in metaphysics, 
           but the skeptical strain he revealed in his early writing remained. 
           One of his lecture announcements a few years later proclaimed the 
           “true method of instruction in philosophy” to be “zetetic, as it was 
           called by some of the ancients,” meaning “to search for,” but better 
           known by our modern term “skepticism.”17 Doubt for Kant was “not 
           dogmatic but a doubt of waiting,” for the “method of doubting is 
           useful because it makes the soul act not from speculation but from 
           healthy understanding.”18
              Kant sensed a powerful strain of thought emanating from the 
           ancient world. This strain doubted the certainties of dogma, which, 
           like Swedenborg, would presume to speak of eternal truths beyond 
           the reach of the human senses, and it also doubted the senses them-
           selves, whose data wa.ed in the ﬁckle currents of time and space. 
           From  its  ancient  sources  the  strain  had  passed  through  Hellenis-
           tic and Arab interpreters; it helped forge the outlines of Christian 
           theology;  and  it  would  ultimately  leave  an  indelible  imprint  on 
           modern  thought  and  science.  Its  earliest  systematic  formulations, 
           though, come to us from a series of conversations conducted in the 
           marketplaces and private houses of ancient Athens by a freethinking 
           and at times annoyingly contrarian philosopher.


           +%&# *':-"$&* 9&$ !"-9&#18&* and Zeno in Athens, he was still a 
           bit of an upstart. Philosophers who had thronged the Agora for this 
           grand occasion listened attentively to Zeno read from his book. But 
           when he had ﬁnished, the young Socrates leaped to his feet to chal-
           lenge the imposing sage and his venerable mentor, Parmenides. The 
           visitors claimed that ultimately there exists one massive, immutable 
           reality and that any change is an illusion. Parmenides had concocted 
           this theory as a way of dealing with the incompatibility between the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   31                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           32              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           fact that things change and the apparent constancy of those things. 
           Unlike Heraclitus and his followers, who gave up on such stability 
           altogether and insisted that nothing existed other than change, Par-
           menides landed on an all- encompassing and static being as the true 
           ultimate nature of reality, which he called simply “the one.”
             Now,  the  reader  may  certainly  be  forgiven  for  asking  where, 
           exactly, the problem lies with accepting that there are things and 
           that  those  things  change.  And  in  fact,  that’s  precisely  what  the 
           young Socrates asked Parmenides himself: “If someone should dem-
           onstrate that I am one thing and many, what’s astonishing about 
           that? He will say, when he wants to show that I’m many, that my 
           right side is di7erent from my le., and my front from my back, and 
           likewise with my upper and lower parts. . . . But when he wants to 
           show that I’m one, he will say I’m one person among the seven of 
           us, because I also partake of oneness. Thus he will show that both 
           are true.”19
             In ensuing years Socrates would eventually work out the kinks 
           in his attempt to contend with the problem of the material world’s 
           mutability,  leading  to  the  inﬂuential  theory  of  eternal,  unchang-
           ing Forms with which his student Plato would become associated. 
           On  this  particular  day,  though,  Socrates  got  schooled.  A.er  ﬁrst 
           exchanging knowing smiles with Zeno and expressing his profound 
           admiration  for  Socrates,  Parmenides  drilled  down  into  Socrates’s 
           challenge. “How neatly you make one thing be in many places at 
           the same time!” Parmenides slyly needled the younger thinker. “It’s 
           as if you were to cover many people with one sail, and then say that 
           one thing is also able to cover many. Or isn’t that the sort of thing 
           you mean to say?”20
             When Socrates shakily conceded that the image could account 
           for his position, Parmenides already had him trapped: “In that case 
           would the sail be, as a whole, over each person, or would one part of 
           it be over one person and another part over another?”21 A crestfallen 
           Socrates  soon  found  himself  admitting  that  the  sail  in  the  exam-
           ple would indeed be divisible, and hence not one and unchanging. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   32                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       33

           More to the point, he realized he’d been knocked o7 his perch a bit, 
           cut down to size by a master thinker, and readily agreed to a dem-
           onstration of how to use dialectical analysis to get to deeper truths. 
           During the dialogue that ensued, Parmenides gave a master class in 
           what posterity would come to call the Socratic method.
              But he did something else as well. He revealed a secret. The secret 
           animated Zeno’s paradoxes and reverberated through the teachings 
           of Socrates’s subsequent student Plato. It would become a keystone 
           of Plato’s student Aristotle’s theories many years later, and centuries 
           a.er that it would seep into the theological disputes that gave form 
           to  Christian  doctrine,  indelibly  marking  the  progress  of  western 
           philosophy and science. The secret Parmenides revealed to Socrates 
           in their meeting in Athens was this: as we humans delve ever deeper 
           in our quest to reveal the ultimate nature of reality, there is a stain 
           in the picture that emerges, a kind of black hole that recedes ahead 
           of us, and that we cannot seem to dispel even as the tools at our 
           disposal evolve from thought experiments and stories to the awe-
           some technologies that drive experimental science today. That stain 
           is what we might call the paradox of the moment of change: the 
           instantaneous sliver of time when something, some particle, must 
           be both perfectly identical to itself in space and time, so as to be the 
           thing that changes, and somehow di7erent, so as to have changed 
           at all.


           $%& ,&"-  %& $0-#&8  forty,  Kant’s  life  changed.  Over  the  prior 
           decade his standard of living had improved considerably. His lec-
           tures became ever more popular, and the resulting increase in stu-
           dent fees allowed him to upgrade his housing, his wardrobe, and 
           even his entertainment. Only some ﬁve years earlier, the coat he wore 
           each day was so frayed that one of his friends o7ered to buy him a 
           new one. Now, as he wowed his students in lecture halls, charmed 
           noblewomen at swank dinner parties, or attended the theater with 
           his  best  friend,  Johann  Friedrich  von  Funk,  he  was  sure  to  stand 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   33                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           34              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           out for the elegance of his attire. Aesthetics matter, Kant explained. 
           Colors in particular. With a brown coat, one should wear a vest of 
           a complementary color, such as yellow. As he strolled the streets of 
           Königsberg, a ceremonial sword o.en dangled at his side.
             Not  that  he  would  have  used  it.  Kant  was  an  attractive  man, 
           by all counts, but he was very slight of build (about ﬁve feet, two 
           inches) and su7ered from a ﬂat chest, which constricted his breath-
           ing. Athletic prowess was not his long suit. His eyes, in contrast, had 
           a  mesmerizing  e7ect  on  interlocutors. In  the  words  of  a  gushing 
           contemporary, “Kant’s eye was as if it had been formed of heavenly 
           ether from which the deep look of the mind visibly shone forth. It 
           is impossible to describe the bewitching e7ect of his look on my 
           feeling when I sat across from him and when he suddenly raised his 
           lowered eye to look at me. I always felt as though I looked through 
           his blue ether- like ﬁre into the most holy [eye] of Minerva.”22
             With his style, his wit and charm, and his eyes, Kant had certainly 
           become a man- about- town. As Hamann would later recount, Kant 
           spent  most  of  his  a.ernoons  and  evenings  in  society, “not  infre-
           quently participating in a suite of playing cards, and o.en return-
           ing home only past midnight.”23 Kant’s late evenings out, attending 
           theater and concerts— this whirlwind of activity almost always took 
           place in the company of Funk. And then, without warning, Kant’s 
           best friend died.
             The loss of a close friend, perhaps his closest, seems to have put 
           life on hold for Kant. While Funk lived, Kant lectured and wrote 
           on a seemingly bewildering array of topics with a lightness to his 
           approach, a virtuosity unencumbered by much personal commit-
           ment.  Now  the  words  he  wrote  to  Funk’s  mother  a.er  her  son’s 
           untimely death were understandably somber. In the letter, which he 
           published as an open elegy to Funk, Kant characterized the variabil-
           ity of life as a “magic lantern” whose “play of shadows” will be cut 
           short by a death that we overlook while in the thick of our lives. He 
           contrasts this time, “while we are dreaming” still, with something he 
           calls a “great destination beyond the grave.” Concentrating on that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   34                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       35

           eternal destination rather than on the ﬂickering magic lantern of 
           life, a wise man will be “rational in his plans, but without being stub-
           born, . . . modest in his wishes, but without being censorious, trust-
           ing without insisting, and active in fulﬁlling his duties,” all the while 
           remaining ready for when God calls “us from this state amidst all 
           its striving.”24 Indeed, from this point on, Kant’s philosophy begins 
           to sharpen its focus on a central goal, “something in us that we can 
           never cease to wonder at once it has entered our sight,” something 
           that “elevates the idea of humanity to a dignity which one might not 
           expect” to ﬁnd among the vagaries of a given person’s life.25
              While Kant searched for this cause of wonder elevated above the 
           ﬂow of life in the here and now, a store of eternal values in which 
           to  anchor  human  dignity,  he  started  to  make  social  choices  that 
           reﬂected  this  search.  A  part- time position  in  one  of  Königsberg’s 
           libraries boosted his income enough for him to change residences, 
           and he moved into a building owned by his publisher, Johann Jakob 
           Kanter. The building had a bookstore and café on its ground ﬂoor, as 
           well as a larger lecture hall where Kant’s many students could come 
           to hear him speak. Perhaps more important, Kant started to make 
           new friends.
              His  new  circle  included  an  English  merchant  by  the  name  of 
           Joseph Green. Green had the peculiar passion of running his entire 
           life  according  to  strict  maxims  as  opposed  to  whimsy  or  caprice. 
           Such maxims included adhering to one’s word, no matter how triv-
           ial the matter, and arriving punctually at agreed-upon  meeting times 
           no matter how inconvenient. In fact, Kant’s much remarked upon 
           regularity in his later life seems to date to the years of his association 
           with Green, when townspeople knew it was seven o’clock in the eve-
           ning because they could see Kant leaving Green’s house. Of course, 
           Green’s punctiliousness had its drawbacks. Once, when Kant and 
           Green had made a date to meet in the morning to take a trip by car-
           riage to the countryside, Green departed at precisely eight o’clock, 
           as planned. When he passed a slightly tardy Kant by the roadside, he 
           ignored his friend’s frantic gesticulations and continued on his way, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   35                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           36              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           so strictly did he adhere to his maxims.26
             While Kant no doubt resented his abandonment by the side of 
           the road, his friendship with Green reﬂected a shi. in his life and 
           thought, provoked at least in part by the pain of losing Funk. Kant 
           was becoming increasingly convinced that humans simultaneously 
           occupy two radically separate realms: one realm was dominated by 
           the  relative  and  shi.ing  logic  of  time  and  space,  while  the  other 
           was guided by unchanging truths. And yet, strangely, the one realm 
           somehow necessitated the other. Moreover, this division of human 
           existence  into  two  incompatible  and  yet  mutually  indispensable 
           realms implicated all aspects of our endeavors. While he could not 
           yet articulate his insight with the crisp, devastating logic to come, 
           his  writing  and  lecturing  increasingly  strove  toward  an  idea  that 
           would  not  only  clarify  the  nature  of  human  knowledge  but  also 
           provide a road map for the more practical question of how to deter-
           mine a basis for morality.
             Kant’s  idea  in  its  nascent  form  was  this:  human  experience  is 
           characterized  by  change,  but  for  change  to  even  be  perceived  as 
           change,  some  ﬁxed  points  must  exist.  Likewise,  we  humans  are 
           bu7eted by a whirlwind of competing beliefs and desires, but the 
           mere fact that we perceive our beliefs and desires as competing—as  
           opposed to simply being in them and desiring and believing with-
           out reﬂection— indicates the existence of ﬁxed points that underlie 
           and anchor the choices we make, a right course of action that tran-
           scends our quotidian travails.
             In  a  wide- ranging  and  inﬂuential  essay  he  wrote  during  this 
           time called Observations on the Feeling of the Beautiful and Sublime, 
           Kant borrowed a famous image from the Greek thinker Heraclitus: 
           “Everything goes past like a river and the changing taste and the 
           various shapes of men make the whole game uncertain and delusive. 
           Where do I ﬁnd ﬁxed points in nature, which can not be moved by 
           man, and where I can indicate the markers by the shore to which he 
           ought to adhere?”27 Heraclitus’s metaphor had been a description of 
           time. For that thinker everything was ﬂux; stability itself was noth-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   36                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       37

           ing but delusion. Just as we believe the river to be a single thing, but 
           in fact never enter the same river twice, the ﬂow of time ensures that 
           nothing we perceive as stable and persistent is in reality the same as 
           it was. As he entered his ﬁ.h decade, Kant began to repurpose that 
           metaphor, and to search for elusive markers on the shore of the river 
           of life.


           (":) 1# $%& "/'-", Parmenides pressed his advantage, and he did 
           so by homing in on what he called a “queer creature,” the instant of 
           change.28 What does it mean for something to change, for a move-
           ment to take place? Everything that exists, Parmenides reasoned, is 
           either in motion or at rest. And yet, to get from the one state to 
           another, it must pass through a moment that is somehow “neither 
           in motion nor at rest.”29 It is precisely that moment which turns out 
           to be the secret ingredient and primary driver of Zeno’s paradoxes.
              As  with  the  paradox  of  Achilles  failing  to  cross  a  ﬁnite  space, 
           because  in  so  doing  he  would  have  to  traverse  inﬁnite  fractions 
           of  that  space— or the  more  mundane  paradox  of  my  inability  to 
           eat a cookie, because I would have to eat inﬁnite fractions of the 
           cookie— all variations of Zeno’s paradox result from the strangeness 
           of the instant of change. This is because what Achilles must cross or 
           I must eat is ultimately the same thing, inﬁnitely many inﬁnitesi-
           mal portions of space and time. Which is exactly what an instant of 
           change is: an inﬁnitely thin slice of space-time  in which a thing is 
           both exactly what it was before and what it is about to become.
              All things change, and yet to change they must cease to be what 
           they were and become what they now are, thereby negating the very 
           permanence or stability implied by their being a thing in the ﬁrst 
           place. The thing, “in changing, it changes at an instant, and when 
           it changes, it would be in no time at all.”30 It quickly becomes evi-
           dent that even motion itself is secondary to the problem, for even 
           an object standing completely still, when it “proceeds from the past 
           to the future, it certainly won’t jump over the now,”31 as Parmenides 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   37                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           38              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           put it. And if nothing “can sidestep the now, whenever a thing is 
           at this point, it always stops its coming-to-  be and then is whatever 
           it may have come to be.”32 If we assume time is inﬁnitely divisible, 
           we can neither age nor move; and if we assume there’s a minimal 
           chunk, an atom or pixel of time something occupies, then again no 
           thing moves, no thing changes, because continuity is broken, and its 
           new manifestation is just that, something entirely new. Each sliver of 
           being is imprisoned in a minuscule eternity of space- time.
             Or, to  put  it  slightly  di7erently, we  can  focus  on  a  particle, or 
           we can focus on its movement, but if we want to see both simul-
           taneously, we can’t. While they may strike us as arcane, as modern 
           physicists began to train their extraordinary instruments on those 
           minimal pixels of space-time,  they discovered that Zeno’s paradoxes 
           weren’t so irrelevant a.er all. They weren’t for Kant either.


           1$ +'028 $")& )"#$ many years to articulate what exactly about 
           Swedenborg’s pretensions so vexed him, but when he did, the real-
           ization came like a thunderclap. The problem was this: we are so 
           accustomed to perceiving a world extended in space and successive 
           in time that we naturally project those qualities onto all our intellec-
           tual endeavors. Take the example of our very own personhood. Since 
           we naturally tend to conceive of things as being extended in space 
           and having duration in time, we implicitly apply the same structure 
           to ourselves. We think of our self, be it our soul or our consciousness, 
           as existing somewhere in our body. We imagine it to have come into 
           being at a certain time, and perhaps openly believe or secretly hope 
           it will live on past our physical demise. However, we fool ourselves 
           when we think that this way of talking about ourselves in space and 
           time has any validity outside space and time. As Kant put it, “One 
           can quite well allow the proposition The soul is substance to be valid, 
           if only one admits that this concept of ours leads no further, that 
           it cannot teach us any of the usual conclusions of the rationalistic 
           doctrine of the soul, such as, e.g., the everlasting duration of the soul 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   38                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       39

           through all alterations, even the human being’s death, thus that it 
           signiﬁes a substance only in the idea not in reality.”33
              The soul or consciousness, in fact, is nothing but the unity of 
           a sense of self over time, the bare fact that to perceive and then to 
           articulate our perceptions something must connect from this very 
           instant to another, and another a.er that. This connecting of dispa-
           rate slices of space-time  is a necessary condition of the possibility 
           of knowing anything at all, but it is not itself a thing in space and 
           time, a thing that survives our existence on earth. When we believe 
           that it is, we end up conjuring the kinds of ghost stories with which 
           Swedenborg beguiled his readership.
              The  risk  far  exceeds  simply  falling  for  spirit- seers  and  treat-
           ing  pulp  ﬁction  as  dogma.  If  this  projection  leads  us  as  a  matter 
           of course into superstitious beliefs and underlies fanaticisms of all 
           kinds, in the realm of science it engenders its own sorts of error and 
           confusion. It leads us to expect nature at the smallest and largest 
           registers to act exactly as we are accustomed to experiencing it at 
           human registers. It leads us to impose prejudices that impede that 
           very  attribute  of  science  that  is  its  greatest  strength:  its  humility; 
           the explicit acceptance that our knowledge can always expand, will 
           always be revised.
              Kant now saw that the fact we can even experience the turbulent 
           currents of the river of life depends on our assuming the existence 
           of stable markers along the river’s banks, even if we can never see 
           them with our own eyes. Thus did he learn to distinguish what we 
           experience in the world from what we cannot experience in itself, but 
           what makes it possible for us to experience anything at all. At the same 
           time, he realized that these projections of reason that allow us to 
           make sense of the river’s meanderings could push us too far, could 
           inspire us to make idols out of our tools, ghosts out of the ideas we 
           use to draw consistent conclusions about the world. And as abso-
           lutely necessary as the assumptions of permanent, ine7able truths 
           were for producing an accurate understanding of the physical world, 
           the ghosts and idols we tend to turn those assumptions into were 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   39                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           40              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           destined to become metaphysical prejudices that could only hamper 
           the success of our science. It would therefore be crucial to stay criti-
           cally attuned to how we go about doing science, how we go about 
           forming correct judgments of the world, so we can catch ourselves 
           before our reason naturally takes us too far. Philosophy, his philoso-
           phy, if he wanted to set reason’s house in order, had to embody such 
           critique.
             Finally, Kant realized that among the clues that can tell us when 
           our reason is leading us astray are contradictions that arise when we 
           start thinking about the necessary projections of our reason, those 
           stable anchors along the riverbanks of change, as if they were objects 
           in  space  and  time.  He  saw  that  doing  so  leads  us  to  draw  a  per-
           fectly airtight proof for one proposition and then an equally ﬂawless 
           proof for its complete opposite— with no way to resolve them. We 
           can argue with Hume, for instance, that the world consists of noth-
           ing but unconditioned impressions, and no one can dismantle our 
           reasoning. Or we can insist the exact opposite with the rationalists, 
           and argue that the world expresses a master code, with nothing le. 
           to chance. And again, our reasoning will appear perfect. We can drill 
           down into this very instant and come face to face with a particle of 
           pure, unchanging being, or we can fall unceasingly into the vanish-
           ing abyss of divisibility that gapes at our feet.
             This, Kant said, is what Zeno taught us, and “to those who judged 
           him, it appeared that he wanted entirely to deny two mutually con-
           tradictory  propositions,  which  is  absurd.”  Kant,  however,  did  not 
           ﬁnd Zeno absurd.34


           "* ('-/&* +'028 #'$& more than two thousand years later, Zeno 
           proved hard to refute. Aristotle thought he was refuting the para-
           doxes even as he transcribed them. But generations of philosophers 
           have agreed that his response— while certainly preferable to that of 
           Diogenes the Cynic, whose retort was to stand up and walk— never 
           really dealt with the challenge head- on. For Aristotle, the reason we 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   40                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       41

           fall into paradox when we assume the inﬁnite divisibility of time 
           and space is that we are confusing potential divisibility with actual 
           division.  In  theory,  he  argued,  you  could  go  on  cutting  space  in 
           half or go on homing in forever and ever on smaller and smaller 
           units of time. But when you attempt to actualize that potential you 
           always fall short because, as Hegel— the greatest German thinker of 
           the nineteenth century— put it with uncharacteristic clarity, “actual 
           motion is progression through a limited space and a limited time 
           and not through inﬁnite space and inﬁnite time.”35
              What Zeno grasped, which is why merely getting up to take a 
           walk fails to refute him, is that motion or change is self- contradictory 
           when we mistake, as we tend to do, real things for the ideas of those 
           things. On the one hand, we think of motion or change as some-
           thing that happens to a thing itself. On the other hand, the motion 
           of that thing is meaningless without reference to some other things, 
           just as the change of a thing means nothing without reference to 
           that thing at another time: “Motion is plainly relative; whether in 
           absolute space the eye, for instance, rests, or whether it moves, is all 
           the same.”36 But precisely for that reason, trying to bracket out the 
           interference of other places in space or other moments in time to 
           understand what it means for a thing to change is a little like trying 
           to analyze color by turning o7 the lights: when we try to measure 
           or deﬁne motion or change in an object as it is in itself, motion and 
           change seem to dissipate before our eyes.
              So  more  than  a  century  later,  when  Heisenberg  explained  to 
           Pauli that the path a thing takes through space-time  “only comes 
           into existence through this, that we observe it,” this was another way 
           of saying that things in space and time are, by deﬁnition, always in 
           relation to other things and that someone, an observer, needs to put 
           them in that relation.


           +%12& %1*$'-, 1* 30AA, on this point, when Elea succumbed to a 
           tyrant, Zeno conspired to overthrow him. The tyrant then captured 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   41                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           42              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           him and subjected him to unimaginable tortures with the aim of 
           getting him to betray his accomplices. With his dying breath Zeno 
           coaxed the tyrant near to him, but rather than whisper the names 
           of his friends in his ear, as the tyrant hoped and expected, he bit 
           it  o7. In  other  stories  he  bites  o7  his  own  tongue  and  spits  it  in 
           the tyrant’s face before being beaten to death.37 Thus in a strange 
           way,  Zeno’s  life  embodies  the  very  split  his  paradoxes  exploit:  he 
           could be at once a thinker of frustratingly abstract ideas, arguing 
           to anyone who would listen that change of any kind is an illusion, 
           and yet when the time came to act, he did so with extraordinary 
           determination. Could it not be that in some way we are all Zenos, 
           using abstract ideas to make sense of a material world in which we 
           ultimately must live, make decisions, act, and eventually die?
             In dreaming up his paradoxes, Zeno had realized something that 
           Kant would eventually articulate with searing precision. We never 
           encounter our own self in this very instant as anything other than 
           the trace of our relation to some other instant, receding before us or 
           arising ahead.38 But as Kant learned from being challenged by Hume, 
           that self cannot be reduced to anything smaller or briefer than a 
           relation between at least two slices of space- time. A truly momen-
           tary self would not be a self in the ﬁrst place. Thus the very fact 
           that we experience change means something remained unchanged. 
           And yet, while we must presume a dimension of unchanging things, 
           stable markers of our passage from moment to moment in the river 
           of time, when we try to use the tools that enable us to grasp our 
           everyday experience in space and time to visualize those unchanging 
           things, we engender the very strangeness that Zeno forced the world 
           to confront.
             Still, from Zeno, from Plato, from the loss of his dearest friend, 
           and from the quirky obsessions of a new one, Kant learned some-
           thing equally profound. Just being adri. on time’s river is not an 
           option. As he delved deep into the ultimate nature of change and 
           motion, space and time, Kant realized they not only were issues for 
           scientists to explore but also held implications for our understand-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   42                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                        A Brief History of This Very Instant       43

           ing of powerful human impulses. Yes, Swedenborg might have been 
           a charlatan, but the thirst to believe in the extension and possible 
           immortality  of  the  soul  is  the  consequence  of  a  natural,  almost 
           unavoidable intellectual mistake. Indeed, when Kant’s friend Funk 
           died, he found himself forced to confront what is in some ways the 
           ultimate example of the instant of change: the fact that all that we 
           love will pass, including life itself. Even more poignantly, the very 
           ineradicable nature of that constant, irresistible erosion of the pres-
           ent is what endows our life and the attachment we make in it with 
           all of their value. We love because, and only because, we lose.39
              Nonetheless, it is the very power of our reason, which has helped 
           us achieve so much, that surprisingly gets in the way of recogniz-
           ing this simple fact. Zeno brought Kant this clarity, because it was 
           Zeno  who  revealed  the  paradox  that  undergirds  these  prejudices, 
           the antinomies that erupt when we follow our very natural tenden-
           cies and desires and turn into eternal idols the tools reason gave us 
           to make sense of the here and now. By understanding what Zeno 
           had uncovered, Kant now began to glimpse how we need both the 
           humility science requires and the guidance, even motivation of our 
           presumption of unchanging ideals. For the markers we search for 
           on the banks of time’s river motivate us in mysterious ways. Stand-
           ing on the precipice of this very instant, we stare into the abyss of 
           the eternal. Desire for that abyss fuels powerful human impulses: 
           romantic ecstasy; religious fervor; artistic creation; compassion for 
           others; even the courage and conviction to transcend our inclina-
           tions and do the right thing, no matter the cost to ourselves. But 
           to believe we can exposit that abyss, that we can package it into the 
           language and logic of space and time— to think we can visualize the 
           impossibly small, the inﬁnitely whole, describe the world before its 
           beginning or a.er its end, know the fate written in our stars— such 
           pretension leads us astray. It would be more than another century 
           before technologies of observation and the mathematics of a new 
           physics would lead us to the threshold of the kinds of observations 
           Zeno imagined and Kant logically derived. But when they ﬁnally 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   43                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           44              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           did, Heisenberg came to a similar realization, and brazenly, against 
           the wishes of his elders, he designed a way of dealing with the small-
           est of things, the traces of this very instant, without giving in to the 
           desire to visualize them.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   44                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                       3

                           VISUALIZE THIS!


                 , 4BCC, #1&2* ('%- had  become  the  world’s  leading  ﬁg-
                 ure in the ﬁeld of atomic structure. That year the director of 
           Bthe Institute for Theoretical Physics at Göttingen University 
           in Germany, a rigorously mathematical physicist named Max Born, 
           invited Bohr to give a series of lectures. The picturesque university 
           town would soon become one of three hot spots for the new theo-
           retical physics along with Munich and Copenhagen. Max Born him-
           self would become one of the ﬁeld’s founding fathers, before being 
           hounded from his post with Germany’s other top Jewish scientists. 
           Bohr’s lectures in Göttingen drew physicists from around Europe 
           and had all the trappings of a major cultural event. Attendees even 
           took to referring to the series as the “Bohr Festival.”1 It was in Göt-
           tingen that Bohr laid out his new model for the atomic structure, 
           with electrons conﬁned to “shells” determined by their energy level. 
           And  it  was  in  Göttingen  that  a  twenty- year- old student  who  was 
           visiting for a semester to work with Born also attended the Bohr Fes-
           tival before returning to Munich to complete his doctorate. Unbe-
           knownst to either professor, in only three more years that student 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   45                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           46              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           would make the ﬁrst of a series of discoveries that would deﬁnitively 
           close the door on classical physics.


           $'8", +& 91/%$ :"22 a young man who is athletic, conscientious, 
           and ambitious a “boy scout.” In Werner Heisenberg’s case, the term 
           applied literally as well as ﬁguratively. The younger of two broth-
           ers born into a bourgeois family in Munich, Werner was sickly as 
           a young child, almost dying of a lung infection when he was just 
           ﬁve. Indeed, he su7ered from intermittent allergies much of his life, 
           which makes his strong attachment to the outdoors and scouting all 
           the stranger. When Heisenberg arrived in Göttingen from Munich 
           to join the team of researchers there in 1922, Born said he looked 
           “like a simple peasant boy, with short, fair hair, clear bright eyes and 
           a charming expression.”2
             The peasant boy had qualiﬁed to work with Born for good rea-
           son. In school he had excelled in all disciplines, although early on 
           he was drawn by the beauty of mathematics, in particular its cor-
           respondence  to  the  real  world  and  its  seeming  magical  ability  to 
           solve  practical  problems  and  predict  real  outcomes,  a  correspon-
           dence that struck him “as remarkably strange and exciting,” as he 
           later  recalled.3  His  mathematical  abilities  quickly  blossomed, and 
           when his parents asked the sixteen-year-  old boy to help a friend of 
           the family’s with her university math courses, he had taught himself 
           calculus so he could in turn teach it to her. By the time he had to 
           present his own skills for graduation from high school, his examiner 
           could write with some amazement of the “playful ease” with which 
           he solved Newton’s equations of motion, “with air resistance taken 
           into account.”4
             Despite this background, Born’s initial assessment wasn’t far o7 
           the mark. Heisenberg had indeed been working as something akin 
           to a simple peasant boy—as  a farmhand, in fact, trying to support 
           himself and his family in the economic and social devastation that 
           was Germany of the immediate postwar years.5 His hometown of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   46                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   47

           Munich  had  devolved  into  chaos  a.er  the  armistice,  with  armed 
           political factions roaming the streets and claiming sections of the 
           city as their ﬁefdoms. Heisenberg would recall ﬂeeing “the sounds 
           of shooting, without knowing where the ﬁghting was.”6 From the 
           dust and disruption on the streets, he found solace in the country-
           side and mountains, and in conversations and the world of ideas. 
           Speciﬁcally, Platonic ideas.
              One particularly violent morning, he found his way to the roof 
           of his school building. Safe for the time being from the danger of 
           the streets, he sat there soaking in the morning sun before ﬁshing 
           a  volume  out  of  his  book  bag  and  starting  to  read,  his  legs  dan-
           gling from the edge of the roo.op.7 It was Plato’s dialogue Timaeus, 
           which recounts the philosopher’s speculations as to the fundamen-
           tal makeup of the world. The son of a classics professor, Heisenberg 
           had more occasion than most young men his age to read Greek phi-
           losophy, and he found in Plato’s dialogue Timaeus an idealist coun-
           terpoint to the erector- set diagrams of his science classroom. In its 
           pages the philosopher speculated that all the substances of the world 
           were reducible to a few elements, invisible building blocks whose 
           geometry determined their properties. Of these elemental particles 
           Plato wrote, “The ﬁrst thing the god then did was give them their 
           distinctive shapes, using forms and numbers.”8 By way of a complex 
           analysis,  Plato  decided  that  earth,  the  basis  for  all  solids,  is  made 
           of  quadrangles  and  that  each  of  the  remaining  elements— water, 
           air,  and  ﬁre—assumes  its  relative  mobility  and  particular  quality 
           from its size and shape: “In all these cases the body that has the few-
           est faces is of necessity the most mobile, in that it, more than any 
           other, has edges that are the sharpest and best ﬁt for cutting in every 
           direction.”9
              Heisenberg didn’t swoon. As he later recalled, “The whole thing 
           seemed to be wild speculation, pardonable perhaps on the ground 
           that  the  Greeks  lacked  the  necessary  empirical  knowledge.”10  Yet 
           Plato had also planted a seed. When Heisenberg had learned about 
           the  structure  of  atoms  in  school,  Bohr’s  innovations  had  not  yet 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   47                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           48              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           reached German schools, and as a result Heisenberg puzzled over 
           his textbooks’ deeply unsatisfying images of atoms held together in 
           molecules by “hooks and eyes . . . , quite arbitrary structures whose 
           shape could be altered at will to adapt them to di7erent technical 
           tasks”— not quite what the young thinker would expect of a physics 
           that was supposed to be “governed by strict natural laws.” As crazy as 
           a world constructed of tiny pyramids and tetrahedrons sounded, did 
           colored balls held together by hooks seem much saner? Wouldn’t it 
           make more sense to conceive of atoms not as concrete models taken 
           from our everyday experience but as ideas constructed via mathe-
           matical proofs? As he would later reﬂect, “I was gaining the growing 
           conviction that one could hardly make progress in modern atomic 
           physics without a knowledge of Greek natural philosophy.”11
             The other aspect of Greek thought that inﬁltrated Heisenberg’s 
           early consciousness was its dialogic nature. Escape from the violence 
           of the streets also meant leaving the city for the countryside, which 
           Heisenberg did as o.en as he could. With his friends he would hike 
           the ﬁelds and mountains around Munich, using their rich conversa-
           tions as a compass to guide them out of the bedlam of their daily 
           lives. Heisenberg would later credit these walks as being among the 
           primary inspirations for his passion for physics, for among the top-
           ics his friends and he would discuss was the nature of the physical 
           world and our knowledge of it.
             One clear day as they walked together through the hill country 
           to the west of Lake Starnberg, they pushed through a clearing in the 
           trees that revealed to them the expanse of the lake as it stretched to 
           the mountains beyond. It was on this day, Heisenberg would later 
           recall, that his desire to understand the natural world, right down 
           to the level of its constituent parts, was born.12 The group had read 
           many of the same books; works of Kant ﬁgured along with those 
           of classical philosophy, and his inﬂuence seeped in as well. As they 
           bantered away, free for a moment from the maelstrom in the city 
           below, Heisenberg began to grasp a concept that would be decisive 
           for his later work as a physicist. When we explore the natural world, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   48                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   49

           we don’t see things directly as they are in themselves but translate 
           them ﬁrst into mental images and then ﬁnally into concepts. It is 
           only when we have ﬁltered our bare impressions through concepts 
           that we can say we have experienced them.
              Concepts  were  words, of  course, and  words  were  what  ﬂowed 
           back and forth in dialogues. Each dialogue could only take place 
           within a group of at least two members. No one on his or her own 
           owned the truth. But truth could emerge slowly from the negotia-
           tion between the participants in the conversation. What one needed 
           to look for was something not available to any individual on his 
           or her own. Heisenberg thought of this as “the middle ground,” a 
           place where truth emerged from the relation between elements as 
           opposed to residing in any one of them.
              One day as he walked along Leopoldstrasse in Munich, a young 
           man from one of the other groups that roamed the city approached 
           and told him that the youth of the city had agreed to meet at Schloss 
           Prunn, a medieval castle several hours to the north of the city. Some-
           thing needed to be done; some solution to the daily struggles needed 
           to be found. A train trip later, Heisenberg joined a growing group of 
           young people, mostly students but also some former soldiers who 
           had survived the horrors of the war, in the courtyard of the castle 
           built  high  into  the  cli7side  overlooking  the  Altmühl  river  valley. 
           There they spent many hours debating the big questions posed by 
           their current situation: whether the fate of their own people or that 
           of  the  outer  world  was  more  important;  whether  those  who  had 
           died in the war had done so in vain; what path would bring hope to 
           their country and their future.
              As he considered the various positions, the young Heisenberg 
           became more and more conscious of how desperately lacking the 
           middle  ground  was;  no  solution  could  be  found  as  long  as  each 
           group stuck to its guns. Suddenly there appeared on the balcony 
           overlooking the courtyard a young man with a violin. As the sound 
           of  the  opening  double  stop  of  the  Chaconne  from  Bach’s  Partita 
           no. 2 in D Minor ﬂoated down into the courtyard, the assembled 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   49                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           50              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           youth stopped arguing and listened, and Heisenberg was struck by a 
           sense of hope and possibility: “One could speak of a middle ground, 
           open to all sides, in Plato, or in Bach, in the language of music or of 
           philosophy or of religion, so there must also be such a space in our 
           future.”13
             Upon acing his ﬁnal exams with customary ease in the spring of 
           1920, Heisenberg did what he would always do when he felt he had 
           been working too much and needed to recharge his batteries. He 
           went hiking with his group of friends, now o<cially a scout troop. 
           His troop (called the Heisenberg group, under his leadership) had 
           earned a reputation for pushing things a little far. He had recently 
           ﬁshed  one  of  his  scouts  out  of  a  crevasse,  and  personally  skied 
           another down a mountain a.er the young man broke his leg. On 
           this outing, however, Heisenberg almost did himself in. The boys 
           stopped at a castle a.er a long day’s hike and asked if they could 
           sleep inside. The keepers agreed and the boys settled in—without  
           being aware that it had served as a typhoid ward the previous year. 
           Though none of his charges caught the illness, Heisenberg started to 
           develop severe bellyaches and a high fever— telltale signs of typhoid. 
           Indeed, he had contracted the deadly disease and was only nursed 
           back to health by an uncle who happened also to be a family doctor 
           and who managed to ﬁnd him fresh eggs and milk each day despite 
           the shortages of the postwar economy.14
             Miraculously having managed a full recovery, the eighteen-year-  
           old showed up for classes at the University of Munich the following 
           fall. There he would study physics at one of the burgeoning centers 
           of innovation on quantum theory: the institute run by the imposing 
           and yet congenial Arnold Sommerfeld, where Heisenberg enrolled 
           with another young superstar recently arrived from Vienna, Wolf-
           gang Pauli. When Sommerfeld took a leave to teach in the United 
           States less than two years later, he sent Heisenberg to work with Max 
           Born in Göttingen, where he would become a central ﬁgure in the 
           group responsible for what would soon be called the new Göttin-
           gen physics. But even before then, the freshman physics student in 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   50                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   51

           Munich made his ﬁrst in a series of advances that would set the stage 
           for the development of quantum mechanics.


           $%& "/& '3 D0"#$09 physics began in December 1900. The man 
           who launched the most signiﬁcant scientiﬁc revolution since Gali-
           leo did not come across as much of a rebel. Indeed, he was a hard-
           working, somewhat conservative man of science. It would be many 
           years before he would accept the truth of what he had discovered, 
           and he sought for the rest of his life to avoid its implications.
              Already a well- established scientist, Max Planck made his most 
           important mark at the relatively advanced age of forty-two,  when he 
           had held the chair in theoretical physics in Berlin for the previous 
           eight years. He spent the previous half decade working on a prob-
           lem that had bedeviled physicists for some time. If a receptacle, say 
           a metal tube, is entirely closed o7 at both ends save for a tiny hole 
           and then heated up, small amounts of electromagnetic energy will 
           escape through the hole. This so- called black- body radiation can be 
           analyzed by a spectrograph.15 Depending on the temperature of the 
           tube,  it  will  release  small  amounts  of  low-frequency   waves  and  a 
           much larger proportion of medium- frequency waves and then taper 
           o7 again at the high end of the wavelength spectrum.
              Curiously, these ﬁndings contradicted what scientists predicted 
           should happen. If light were transmitted as a wave, as experts thought 
           they  had  established,  the  amount  of  radiation  should  increase  in 
           proportion  to  the  frequency  of  its  wavelength.  This  makes  sense. 
           The  smaller  the  waves  spreading  across  a  given  surface, the  more 
           of them there are: think of the tiny ripples on a pond compared 
           with the relatively scarce swells that big-wave  surfers wait for o7 the 
           coasts of California or Portugal. This is true of all sorts of waves. The 
           smaller the magnitude, the higher the frequency—much  as a guitar 
           string being tightened produces a higher pitch as its vibrations stir 
           up smaller and faster air waves—and  hence the higher the number 
           of waves. And yet, for some reason, light bucks that trend. It’s a good 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   51                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           52              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           thing it does, too. If it did not, everyday lightbulbs would bathe us in 
           deadly high- frequency radiation every time we turned them on— a 
           theoretical expectation that scientists call, somewhat melodramati-
           cally, the ultraviolet catastrophe. That this catastrophe didn’t occur 
           in reality was certainly comforting, but it didn’t make sense. And 
           Max Planck wanted to know why.16
             In the summer of 1900, Planck tried something new. He turned 
           from the theory of electrodynamics to thermodynamics, speciﬁcally 
           to that theory’s second law, which states that the entropy of a closed 
           system increases over time. Entropy indicates a system’s disorder. An 
           egg is highly ordered. An omelet less so. An omelet you have just 
           chewed, swallowed, and digested, even less so. While it is relatively 
           easy to turn that egg into a meal, it is far more di<cult to reverse the 
           process. That, in a nutshell, is entropy.
             Planck, ever the old-school  physicist, believed strongly that laws 
           were laws, and that when they apply, they must apply without excep-
           tion. If entropy is a law, that means that eggs always become more 
           disordered, but the reverse never happens. This conviction led him 
           to  some  rigorous  debates  with  a  dour  Viennese  physicist  by  the 
           name of Ludwig Boltzmann. Boltzmann interpreted the second law 
           of thermodynamics to mean that the entropy of any closed system 
           would tend to increase, but that didn’t mean that it couldn’t decrease 
           in individual cases. Gas molecules will indeed tend to evenly ﬁll a 
           room; however, it is possible that at any given moment they could 
           all cluster together in one part of the room. Possible, but just very 
           unlikely.  Ironically,  it  was  by  borrowing  his  scientiﬁc  opponent’s 
           probabilistic model that Planck stumbled upon a solution to the 
           riddle of black- body radiation.
             For  Boltzmann’s  math  to  work,  Planck  had  to  provisionally 
           break smooth quantities of whatever stu7 he was measuring into 
           chunks and then subject the movements of those chunks to statisti-
           cal analysis. When Planck treated light frequencies as discrete, albeit 
           very tiny, chunks, as opposed to smoothly diminishing wave sizes, 
           he found that the expected distribution of wavelengths reverted to 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   52                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   53

           what was found in the laboratory. In other words, by assuming elec-
           tromagnetic waves had a kind of internal limit keeping them above 
           a minimal size and hence below a maximal frequency, one avoided 
           the ultraviolet catastrophe, and the number of high-frequency  waves 
           tapered o7. He also managed to derive a speciﬁc value that deter-
           mined the cuto7 point at which the theory would conform to the 
           experimental data. This value became known as Planck’s constant. 
           Just as the speed of light is a constant with the notation c, this con-
           stant has its own notation as well, h. As we will soon see, it would 
           become one of the most important numbers in modern physics and 
           a key element of the quantum revolution to follow.
              Planck,  who  continued  to  believe  that  light  was  propagated 
           exclusively  as  waves,  accepted  this  limitation  as  a  kind  of  mathe-
           matical heuristic, but he didn’t believe it corresponded to a physical 
           aspect of the light waves themselves. Instead, he thought this chunk-
           iness might be a signature of the atoms emitting the light, that they 
           could vibrate only at certain frequencies and hence admit or absorb 
           light in speciﬁcally sized chunks, which he called “quanta.” In 1918, 
           Planck won the Nobel Prize for his discovery and is still regarded 
           as one of the most important ﬁgures in twentieth- century science. 
           Nonetheless, as he would later reﬂect, “I can characterize the whole 
           procedure as an act of despair”; “a theoretical interpretation had to 
           be found at any price, however high it might be.”17 Yet, as unpalat-
           able as it might have been for him, Planck seems to have known he 
           had landed on something remarkable. That very December, he told 
           his son about his discovery while on a walk in the Grunewald forest 
           in Berlin. He described it as “a discovery of the ﬁrst rank, compa-
           rable perhaps only to the discoveries of Newton.”18
              That it certainly was. But it would take another scientist, arguably 
           the greatest since Newton, to fully grasp what Planck had unearthed.


           0#21)& 9"E  !2"#:) "$ the time of his discovery, Albert Einstein 
           was virtually unknown when he authored four papers that would 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   53                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           54              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           constitute only the ﬁrst volley of his immeasurable contributions to 
           the history of science. In a year that has since gone down in scientiﬁc 
           history as the most noteworthy since 1666, when Newton conjured 
           up calculus, light spectrometry, and the theory of gravity in a ﬂurry 
           of  creative  genius,  Einstein  authored  those  four  papers  during  a 
           period of three months while working as a clerk in a patent o<ce in 
           Bern, Switzerland. In some ways the position he held couldn’t have 
           suited him better. His gargantuan intellect allowed him to analyze 
           patent applications with ample time le. over to keep up on develop-
           ments in physics. And for the previous few years, he had turned his 
           attention to Planck’s curious discovery.
             Einstein would quickly become by consensus the world’s most 
           important  physicist.  And  yet  despite  his  inﬂuence  and  incredible 
           fame, the Nobel committee would overlook him for more than ﬁf-
           teen years. When he did ﬁnally get the nod (at which point, weary 
           of being snubbed for so many years, he declined to alter his travel 
           plans and was lecturing in Japan when the award was bestowed on 
           him), it was not for his paper on special relativity but for his expla-
           nation  of  the  photoelectric  e7ect,  which  he  advanced  in  a  paper 
           with the title “On a Heuristic Point of View Concerning the Produc-
           tion and Transformation of Light.”19 As the title conveys, Einstein 
           intended his theory as little more than a tool to help scientists along 
           the way toward an answer, rather than being a ﬁnal answer in itself. 
           There is little doubt that the Nobel committee and the scientists 
           who grudgingly overcame disciplinary inertia— as well as overt anti- 
           Semitic propaganda— to honor him went out of their way not to 
           award the prize for relativity. Still, even Einstein himself would later 
           say that his paper on light, among all the others that year, was truly 
           revolutionary.20
             As  is  o.en  the  case,  revolutionary  steps  can  seem  obvious  in 
           hindsight. As we’ve seen, Planck had shown that agitated atoms emit 
           and absorb energy only at certain frequencies but was convinced 
           this had something to do with the atoms, not the light. Nonethe-
           less, in his address to the Berlin Physical Society at the end of 1900, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   54                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   55

           Planck  unequivocally  stated  that  his  calculations  showed  energy 
           emissions to be “composed of a very deﬁnite number of equal ﬁnite 
           packages.”21 This ﬁnding astounded Einstein. As he later wrote, “All 
           of my attempts to adapt the theoretical foundations of physics to 
           this knowledge failed completely. It was as if the ground had been 
           pulled out from under us, with no ﬁrm foundation to be seen any-
           where.”22 In his 1905 paper, Einstein found that ground. And he did 
           so by taking seriously the implications of Planck’s discovery. If light 
           waves were emitted and absorbed in discrete packages, this wasn’t 
           just a mathematical trick or feature of the atoms that emitted and 
           absorbed them. Light itself had the curious ability to behave both as 
           a wave and as a particle.


           +%12& &1#*$&1# 0#*&$$2&8 !%,*1:* by showing that light could 
           behave both as a wave and as a particle, scientists were making great 
           strides digging deeper and deeper into the structure of those par-
           ticles they already knew they had in hand, atoms. In this terrain a 
           British physicist named Ernest Rutherford did the most important 
           work. Working in his institute in Manchester, Rutherford unearthed 
           the atomic structure we still recognize today: a nucleus orbited by 
           a swarm of electrons. In 1912, he was joined by a young Niels Bohr, 
           who  would  work  with  Rutherford  for  the  next  four  years  before 
           returning to Copenhagen to found the institute there that would 
           sear an indelible imprint on the physics of the twentieth century.
              Perhaps  Bohr’s  most  important  quality  as  a  scientist  was  his 
           pragmatic lack of devotion to any particular approach. According 
           to Rutherford’s model of the atom, electrons circled their nuclear 
           cores like planets orbiting the sun in our solar system. The problem 
           with this model is that it does not explain a key result of spectro-
           graphic  analysis,  namely,  that  the  spectrum  emitted  by  hydrogen 
           atoms contains distinct dark lines between strips of color. Bohr real-
           ized that the dark lines represented energy levels that were somehow 
           skipped as the energy emitted by the atoms’ electrons increased or 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   55                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           56              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           decreased. This told him two things. First, that electrons can change 
           their orbits— thankfully something the earth and our neighboring 
           planets do not do. Second, and even more strangely, when they do 
           change,  they  do  so  instantaneously,  without  occupying  any  space 
           between those orbits (in the atomic model these are really energy 
           levels, not orbits). Bohr’s model of the atom thus retained classical 
           elements of Rutherford’s, in that it depended on a picture of dis-
           crete particles circling a nucleus, but it also accurately predicted the 
           experimental data that came from spectroscopy, which Rutherford’s 
           had not been able to do.
             Just  as  with  Einstein’s  light  quanta,  the  electrons  emitted  and 
           absorbed energy only in discrete chunks. This was consistent with 
           their being particles. At the same time, if the electrons were indeed 
           particles,  one  would  assume  that  they  would  behave  consistently 
           as such and have the decency to continue existing in intermediate 
           states. They did not. What they did do, however, was something that 
           added to the mystery and showed scientists working on radiation 
           and matter that their ﬁelds were inevitably converging on a com-
           mon ground. When the electrons changed energy levels, the packets 
           of energy they emitted or absorbed were calculable in precise pro-
           portion to Planck’s constant.


           13 !2"#:)’* 81*:';&-, 1# 1900 uno<cially ushered in the quan-
           tum  revolution,  Bohr’s  paradoxical  redeﬁnition  of  the  electron 
           made it clear for all that a new physics was under way.
             While  Bohr’s  centrality  to  the  history  of  quantum  physics  is 
           beyond dispute, many of his colleagues considered Bohr’s contribu-
           tions to quantum theory more philosophy than physics. And while 
           most  agreed  that  his  theory  of  complementarity—according   to 
           which particles and waves are both pertinent descriptions of quan-
           tum events but neither can tell the whole story on its own—was  the 
           philosophical linchpin of the Copenhagen interpretation, even his 
           closest allies o.en seemed to have di7erent opinions about what it 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   56                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   57

           actually meant.
              This  confusion  was  partly  due  to  Bohr’s  way  of  speaking  and 
           writing. He loved to parse the details of a theory in conversation, 
           asking his interlocutor for a possible interpretation and then pok-
           ing holes in it, leading to ever greater exasperation but not neces-
           sarily to greater clarity. On one occasion this method drove Erwin 
           Schrödinger, who was visiting him at the institute in Copenhagen, 
           to take to his room for several days, ostensibly ill, but more likely to 
           get away from Bohr’s incessant haranguing. Another Austrian physi-
           cist, Paul Ehrenfest, who, unlike Schrödinger, tended to side with 
           Bohr in the controversies around the emerging quantum physics, 
           would go so far as to complain of what he called Bohr’s awful incan-
           tations, “impossible for anyone else to summarize.”23
              In the few years a.er Bohr presented his model of the atom with 
           its  strangely  jumpy  electrons,  scientists  around  the  world  further 
           advanced their understanding of the quantum discontinuity, includ-
           ing the mysterious way that Planck’s constant insisted on popping 
           up  like  a  persistent  but  uninvited  guest.  Egged  on  by  Einstein’s 
           claim that light also behaved as a particle, an American physicist 
           at Caltech named Robert Millikan had spent nearly a decade work-
           ing on a series of experiments intended to prove him wrong. In the 
           process he not only ﬁrmly established that light does indeed propa-
           gate as quanta— which were now called photons— but also derived 
           the most accurate yet value for Planck’s constant. Meanwhile, Ein-
           stein, having wrapped up that little problem called general relativity, 
           turned  his  attention  back  to  quantum  physics,  speciﬁcally  to  the 
           question of when and how the nuclei of certain atoms spontane-
           ously “decay,” emitting particles seemingly of their own accord.
              This  strange  behavior  had  been  recognized  for  almost  two 
           decades, having been discovered by Henri Becquerel and given the 
           name radiation by Marie and Pierre Curie. Importantly, the decay 
           and emission of particles by these elements happened without any 
           external inﬂuence. Einstein’s epiphany this time (he had many of 
           them) was that the sudden jumps in energy levels in Bohr’s atom 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   57                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           58              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           might work according to the same logic as the unpredictable decay 
           seen  in  radioactive  elements  like  uranium  and  radium.  Turning 
           again  to  Ludwig  Boltzmann’s  statistical  models  (Boltzmann  him-
           self, long su7ering from what was likely bipolar disorder, had tragi-
           cally  committed  suicide  ten  years  earlier),  Einstein  worked  out  a 
           model predicting the probability that radiation of a given energy 
           level  would  shi.  to  another  level.  Perhaps  unsurprisingly  at  this 
           point,  Planck’s  enigmatic  constant  again  emerged  as  the  beating 
           heart of his equations. Bohr then adapted Einstein’s ﬁndings into 
           his own expanding atomic model by showing that distinct bands 
           in light spectra were due to certain energy levels being more or less 
           probable than others.24
             Einstein’s introduction of Boltzmann’s probabilistic mathemat-
           ics  into  quantum  behavior  was  akin  to  opening  Pandora’s  box 
           into  the  world  of  classical  physics.  Einstein  himself  would  resist 
           the implications for the rest of his career, but for the time being, 
           everyone, himself included, had to accept that, at least at the atomic 
           level, nuclei decayed and electrons jumped up and down in energy 
           levels— all without discrete identiﬁable causes. With large enough 
           samples  physicists  could  determine  increasingly  likely  outcomes, 
           but  they  could  not  know  the  outcome  for  any  individual  cases. 
           Unlike in classical physics, quanta just seemed to do things without 
           a reason.
             If Einstein resisted his own ﬁndings, Bohr ran with them. His 
           atomic  model,  with  electron  clouds  forming “shells”  in  di7erent 
           numbers  at  di7erent  energy  levels,  allowed  chemists  to  chart  the 
           similarities and di7erences of elements based on where they fell in 
           the periodic table, with elements’ relative stability depending on the 
           number of electrons that “liked” being together at a given energy 
           level. As in other cases, Bohr’s gi. was not to spend too much time 
           or energy wondering why, but simply to accept and move on.


           $%& *$-0:$0-& '3 $%& atom laid out by Bohr had grown new lay-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   58                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   59

           ers  of  complexity  each  year,  and  Arnold  Sommerfeld  was  largely 
           responsible for its new attire. While Bohr had derived three quan-
           tum numbers from his analysis of hydrogen’s spectral lines, which 
           he assigned to the size, shape, and orientation of the presumed orbits 
           of electrons, closer analysis of the light bands revealed that they con-
           tained even smaller hairlines within them. It had fallen to Sommer-
           feld to account for this further splitting by adding a new number 
           to  the  mix.  The  new  value  adequately  matched  the  experimental 
           data,  but  there  didn’t  seem  to  be  a  physical  aspect  of  the  atomic 
           structure to pin it on, so Sommerfeld called it “hidden rotation” and 
           moved on. Pauli— who had come to Sommerfeld’s seminar already 
           well trained in physics, having written an introduction to Einstein’s 
           two relativity theories that would go down in scientiﬁc history as a 
           classic of the genre— didn’t think much of this nonchalance. But he 
           recognized that Sommerfeld’s approach might have fertile ground 
           in the proclivities of his new, less classically trained colleague. As he 
           cynically told an eager Heisenberg, “It’s much easier to ﬁnd one’s 
           way if one isn’t too familiar with the magniﬁcent unity of classical 
           physics . . . , but then lack of knowledge is no guarantee of success.”25
              True  to  Pauli’s  expectations,  Heisenberg  made  full  use  of  his 
           detachment  from  prior  physical  certainties.  When  Sommerfeld 
           handed him the task of fully accounting for the observed oddities 
           in spectral lines, the newly minted physics student came back with a 
           mathematical answer in a surprisingly short time. While all previous 
           numbers had been whole integer multiples of Planck’s famous con-
           stant, Heisenberg tried sequencing Sommerfeld’s enigmatic fourth 
           number  in  terms  of  half  integers.  Amazingly,  the  move  mapped 
           beautifully onto the spectral data.
              This made no sense at all according to any current understand-
           ing of how quanta behave. Indeed, the one seeming consistency of 
           the quantum discontinuities reluctantly discovered by Planck and 
           then a<rmed by Einstein was that they couldn’t be further reduced. 
           Sommerfeld  initially  refused  Heisenberg’s  solution.  A.er  all,  he 
           had  given  the  young  man  this  task  only  four  weeks  a.er  he  had 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   59                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           60              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           begun his studies. A brave stab, perhaps, but also rather impetuous. 
           Soon therea.er Sommerfeld received a paper from an established 
           theorist at Frankfurt named Alfred Landé that made precisely the 
           same  move.  Sommerfeld  promptly  sent  Landé  a  letter  informing 
           him that his calculation “agrees well with what has been found by 
           one of my students (in the ﬁrst semester) but which has not been 
           published.”26 Even though rebu7ed by his adviser and close circle, 
           Heisenberg’s ﬁrst foray was not in fact a bust. It would later turn out 
           that a whole category of quantum particles exhibits behavior that 
           can only be accounted for using Landé’s and, by extension, Heisen-
           berg’s half integers. There can be little doubt the disappointment of 
           this stolen scoop would fuel a future resistance to second-guessing  
           his intuitions.


           +%&# %&1*&#(&-/ &#$&-&8 $%& room for the Bohr Festival in Göt-
           tingen on a balmy spring day in June 1922, he was still only twenty 
           years old. Given the importance of the occasion and the visitor, the 
           front of the room was entirely taken by the faculty and senior stu-
           dents, and he duly took his seat in the back—which  did not stop 
           him from standing up a.er one of Bohr’s presentations to raise an 
           objection, causing all the heads in the room to turn. Bohr for his 
           part already knew of Heisenberg, having heard from Sommerfeld 
           how his precocious student had come up with the half- integer curi-
           osity. Intrigued, he went on a walk with the young man, a.er which 
           they stopped for co7ee and to talk physics. Heisenberg would later 
           say his career began in earnest that day.
             Over the course of the a.ernoon, their discussion waxed from 
           the technical to the philosophical. Heisenberg wanted to know what 
           Bohr really thought about the internal structure of those atoms. As 
           the  rush  of  mathematical  discoveries  in  Munich,  Göttingen,  and 
           Copenhagen further muddied the plausibility of an erector-set  atom 
           with planetlike electrons orbiting the nucleus, how should physi-
           cists visualize what is really going on inside them? Bohr’s answer was 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   60                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   61

           typical and tapped into a propensity in Heisenberg to think in simi-
           lar terms: “When it comes to atoms, language can be used only as 
           in poetry. The poet, too, is not nearly so concerned with describing 
           facts as with creating images and establishing mental connections.”27
              This willingness to forgo assigning distinct, classical images to 
           mathematical  values  was  essential  to  the  series  of  extraordinary 
           advances Heisenberg was poised to make over the next ﬁve years. As 
           the astronomer and philosopher of science Sir Arthur Eddington 
           would write two years a.er Heisenberg’s greatest discovery (and ten 
           years a.er deﬁnitively proving Einstein’s theory of general relativ-
           ity), “No familiar conceptions can be woven round the electron. . . . 
           Something unknown is doing we don’t know what— that is what our 
           theory amounts to.”28 Eddington’s crisp British wit also led him to 
           draw  on  that  of  a  mathematician  of  the  prior  generation  whose 
           fame would come not from science but from letters. It would make 
           as much sense, he added, to refer to electrons and quantum num-
           bers with words such as those penned by Charles Lutwidge Dodg-
           son, better known to us as Lewis Carroll: “Eight slithy toves gyre and 
           gimbal in the oxygen wabe.”29 For Eddington the words of quantum 
           physics were no more descriptive of reality than the made- up jargon 
           of Jabberwocky.
              In 1924, Heisenberg moved to Göttingen to take up the post of 
           Born’s assistant, which Pauli had just vacated. Progress on the atomic 
           model had come to a standstill. As Bohr explained to a captive audi-
           ence at Yale University the previous year, no one could take seriously 
           anymore the image of electrons orbiting a nucleus like planets in a 
           solar system. At the same time, no one quite knew what image to 
           replace it with. Bohr’s own attempt, in a paper he wrote with his 
           then- assistant Hans Kramers and the American physicist John Slater, 
           ended up being a dead end, although it planted a seed. In it the three 
           scientists had tried replacing the image of a discrete electron with 
           something  they  called  a “virtual  oscillator,”  in  other  words,  some 
           entity that behaved at the microscopic level like a rapidly vibrating 
           pendulum or guitar string.30 Kramers would go on to develop the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   61                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           62              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           idea mathematically and show that all spectrographic readings of 
           light interference with atoms could indeed be calculated by assum-
           ing  the  right  set  of  oscillators,  but  he  resisted  giving  up  the  idea 
           that underlying it all were particles moving in a classical way—this  
           despite  the  unnerving  fact  that  a  classical  description  of  particles 
           simply couldn’t account for the gaps that the quantum data insisted 
           on producing.31 Heisenberg had no such qualms.
             Heisenberg  reasoned  that  when  dealing  with  quanta,  all  sci-
           entists had to go on were experimental observations. In any given 
           experimental situation dealing with electrons, one never “saw” the 
           particle itself. Rather, what one saw was an initial energy state and a 
           new state, measured at two di7erent times. Whatever image we give 
           the electron in between those states is doomed to remain a heuris-
           tic, no more useful to us than Lewis Carroll’s slithy tove. What was 
           needed was not a di7erent picture, a more or less slithy tove, but 
           a dependable mathematical operation to describe the relationship 
           between the two observable states.
             Isaac Newton and Gottfried Leibniz had each developed a ver-
           sion of calculus to deal with measurements of curved, continuous 
           spaces. In this sense calculus is the mathematical tool par excellence 
           for modeling the world as conceptualized by classical physics. For 
           the  discontinuous  states  of  quanta,  though,  a  di7erent  math  was 
           needed. A new math for a di7erent kind of space and time, where 
           no baseline continuity could be assumed, but rather rupture and 
           discontinuity. In Göttingen, Max Born was hard at work on ﬁgur-
           ing  out  the  kinds  of  calculations  this  would  require.  Heisenberg, 
           working at his side, could see that Born’s endeavors were a kind of 
           formal equivalent to Kramers and Bohr’s virtual oscillators, in that 
           both assumed gaps and di7erences and not points or continuities as 
           their foundation.32
             Heisenberg’s recollection of the breakthrough rings overly mod-
           est. “The idea suggested itself,” he said in a lecture at St. Andrews 
           University in Scotland some thirty years later, “that one should write 
           down the mechanical laws not as equations for the positions and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   62                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   63

           velocities of the electrons,” but rather that one should work from the 
           other direction: namely, start with the idea of frequencies and ampli-
           tudes, and then derive positions and velocities from those values.33


           1#8&&8, +%"$ 9&-&2, “!-&*&#$&8 itself” this way was an idea as 
           revolutionary as Einstein’s, twenty years earlier, that space and time 
           are not immutable standards but are subject to change as the frame 
           of reference relative to an observer encroaches on the speed of light. 
           In Heisenberg’s case, he decided to treat the classical notions of posi-
           tion and momentum in a similar way, allowing that these long- stable 
           notions  might  lose  their  coherence  at  very  small  frames  of  refer-
           ence.  In  simple  terms,  Heisenberg  decided  to  invert  the  relation-
           ship between particles and movement: movement is not something 
           that happens to particles; particles are something we derive from 
           observations about movement. He now began to see particles along 
           the lines of the “middle ground” he had dreamed of at the meeting 
           among youth factions at the castle on the Rhine, something that 
           emerges from relations as opposed to residing in an individual.
              For  his  calculations  Heisenberg  turned  to  something  called  a 
           Fourier series, the mathematical notation for determining the posi-
           tion  and  velocity  of  an  oscillating  point—say,   a  given  mark  on  a 
           rapidly vibrating string as it completes one cycle—as  a function its 
           possible frequencies. For electrons, similar values could be derived 
           from spectrographs, which are the visual equivalents of the tones 
           we  hear  from  vibrating  strings.  A  brilliant  idea— the  problem 
           remained, however, that the mathematics that resulted from insert-
           ing the highly complex frequencies into the existing equations were 
           simply incomprehensible. To top it all, pollen season had arrived 
           in full force in Göttingen, and the allergy-prone  Heisenberg could 
           barely breathe, so red and swollen was his face.
              On June 7, Heisenberg le. Göttingen to spend some time alone 
           on a barren (and blessedly pollen- free) island in the North Sea called 
           Heligoland. There he applied himself to the notoriously tricky math-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   63                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           64              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           ematics of multiplying not individual values but the complex matri-
           ces of numbers needed to describe the before-and-  a.er energy states 
           of quantum measurements. Cleansed of his allergies by the sea air, 
           Heisenberg worked feverishly day and night, performing herculean 
           calculations. Unable to sleep one night on the island, he went to his 
           desk and worked again, and the numbers started to click. At around 
           three  o’clock  in  the  morning  he  saw  the  answers  emerge.  As  he 
           later recalled, “I had the feeling that, through the surface of atomic 
           phenomena, I was looking at a strangely beautiful interior, and felt 
           almost giddy at the thought that I now had to probe this wealth of 
           mathematical structures nature had so generously spread out before 
           me.”34  As  Born  quickly  realized  upon  Heisenberg’s  return,  in  his 
           search to model the strange behavior of the quanta, the young man 
           had, entirely on his own, worked out a variation of linear algebra, at 
           the time unknown to all but the most committed mathematicians.
             Back in Göttingen, Born worked with Heisenberg and another 
           physicist, Pascual Jordan, on what became known as “the three man 
           paper,” which would lay out for the ﬁrst time the matrix version of 
           quantum mechanics. In their work they saw with wonderment that 
           the laws of movement of classical mechanics could also be derived 
           from  the  new  matrix  mechanics  they  were  using  to  describe  the 
           strange world of quanta. At the same time, another mathematically 
           minded physicist at Cambridge with whom Heisenberg had shared 
           his paper, Paul Dirac, was also discovering this equivalence. In both 
           cases the key to translating the physical laws of the visible world, 
           known  since  Newton,  into  the  enigmatic  numbers  of  quantum 
           mechanics came down to one number: Planck’s constant. Setting 
           Planck’s  constant  to  zero— and since  it  is  already  so  ridiculously 
           small, this is the practical consequence of any measurement of mac-
           roscopic movements— e7ectively removed the di7erences between 
           the two. Just as Einstein had shown that the seeming consistency of 
           space and time crumbles as one approaches one limit, the speed of 
           light, Heisenberg had revealed that the seeming solidity of location 
           and movement dissolved as humans approached another limit, this 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   64                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   65

           one hidden deeper in the crevices of space and time than anyone 
           had ever delved. Until now.


           "* %&1*&#(&-/ "#8 $%&  Göttingen team were putting the ﬁnish-
           ing touches on a new mechanics of discontinuity, another approach 
           to understanding the movement of electrons was brewing. It began 
           with a French aristocrat named Louis de Broglie whose fascination 
           with physics lured him from the traditional family business of civil 
           service. In 1925 he published a doctoral dissertation in which he 
           proposed a mathematical equivalence between properties of mat-
           ter  and  those  of  waves.  Starting  from  Einstein’s  demonstration 
           that light waves also behaved like particles, de Broglie showed that 
           electrons, previously regarded only as particles, could also behave 
           like waves.35 Crucially, de Broglie’s formulas applied to all matter. 
           The larger the mass of an object, the smaller the wavelength of its 
           frequency— which means, for all practical intents, it’s not surpris-
           ing that humans had never before encountered this strange aspect 
           of things. According to his calculations, themselves emerging from 
           Einstein’s work on photons, frequencies would become a factor only 
           when an object’s mass was vanishingly small. Yet again, the standard 
           of that size was Planck’s constant.
              Key to de Broglie’s account was that it could also explain why 
           electrons stayed conﬁned to speciﬁc energy levels. By conceiving of 
           orbits as waves of a given frequency undulating around a nucleus, 
           de Broglie was able to show that the size of each electron shell was 
           determined by the frequency of the wavelength associated with it. 
           The sharp lines in the spectrographic data made sense in that only 
           certain  wavelengths  could  ﬁt  into  orbits  of  speciﬁc  radii  without 
           interfering with themselves. De Broglie sent his paper to Einstein, 
           who  immediately  saw  its  implications  for  Heisenberg’s  theory  of 
           discontinuity, commenting, “I believe that it involves more than a 
           mere analogy.”36 Einstein, ever unhappy with the probabilistic impli-
           cations of his own discoveries, thrilled to the potential evidence that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   65                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           66              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           continuous, physical waves could constitute the reality underlying 
           the discontinuities that the emerging quantum theory kept running 
           into.
             His enthusiasm infected another old-school  physicist who read 
           Einstein’s paper that year. Erwin Schrödinger was already an estab-
           lished scientist. Originally from Vienna, he had held a chair in phys-
           ics at the University of Zurich for several years. A somewhat rakish 
           bon vivant, Schrödinger was married and had several children, none 
           of them from his wife.37 Rather less bohemian in his physics than 
           in  life,  Schrödinger  had  followed  the  advances  of  Bohr  and  his 
           team of wunderkinder with increasing alarm. Surely no one could 
           take seriously the notion that electrons appeared and disappeared 
           without  occupying  space  and  time  in  between  their  appearances. 
           So, Einstein’s imprimatur on de Broglie’s idea was enough to send 
           Schrödinger searching for answers. The formula he came up with 
           in  1926  was  received  by  physicists  with  a  collective  sigh  of  relief. 
           Here  were  none  of  Heisenberg’s  strange  new  ideas  bundled  into 
           brain- racking matrix algebra. In its place Schrödinger had cra.ed an 
           equation of elegant simplicity. Moreover, physicists could recognize 
           it, because it measured things that occurred in reality, waves.
             Right a.er publishing his new theory of “undulatory mechan-
           ics,”  Schrödinger  showed  it  to  be  translatable  into  Heisenberg’s 
           matrix math, and soon therea.er Paul Dirac did the same thing.38 
           Perhaps  Heisenberg’s  mechanics  weren’t  so  strange.  Perhaps  they 
           were a needlessly abstruse version of something that had been hid-
           den all along: a wavelike reality of ﬁelds underlying our world of 
           solid objects in space and time. One that really existed and that fol-
           lowed  classical  mechanical  laws,  in  which  substances  moved  and 
           changed in space and over time, and only appeared as discrete par-
           ticles to our limited senses. Before Schrödinger’s equations Einstein 
           had responded in dour terms to the direction quantum mechanics 
           was taking, writing in a letter, “Heisenberg has laid a large quantum 
           egg. In Göttingen they believe it (I don’t).”39 Now there seemed to 
           be a way to avoid getting splattered by that egg.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   66                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   67

              The problem was, Schrödinger’s attempts to put physics back on 
           the solid ground of classical mechanics by visualizing what happens 
           within atoms in terms of physical waves were not panning out. He 
           traveled to Copenhagen to try to work out his di7erences with Bohr 
           in  person, but  the  visit  turned  into  a  nightmare  as  the  garrulous 
           and meandering deep thinker poked and prodded at Schrödinger’s 
           assumptions.  Waves  are  waves  in  or  of  something,  are  they  not? 
           What is doing the “waving” in the case of electrons? And if waves are 
           smooth, why do they register as particles when we measure them? As 
           Planck had shown decades earlier, even the most recognized wave-
           like energy devolves into quanta when analyzed closely enough. A 
           deeply discouraged Schrödinger would later say, “If we are going to 
           stick to this damned quantum- jumping, then I regret that I ever had 
           anything to do with quantum theory.”40
              Schrödinger le. Copenhagen in 1926 completely fed up with his 
           skirmishes with Bohr. On the one hand, his contention that waves 
           were real wasn’t holding water. On the other, it was by now gen-
           erally accepted that his wave mechanics were equivalent to matrix 
           mechanics  and  signiﬁcantly  wieldier.  The  wave  equation  worked, 
           but  what  did  it  mean?  Back  in  Göttingen,  Max  Born  thought  he 
           had the answer. The waves in Schrödinger’s equations didn’t track 
           the actual movement of real physical substance; like a data set plot-
           ted  out  on  graph  paper,  they  predicted  the  probability  of  where 
           particles would be when they were eventually measured. Particles 
           could move from point to point, and in large enough numbers their 
           whereabouts could be accurately predicted, but any one particle at 
           any given time could pop up pretty much anywhere.
              Typically, Einstein had pointed the way when he interpreted the 
           lines on spectrographs as corresponding to propensities of certain 
           energy  levels  to  radiate. But  if  this  was  the  meaning  of  quantum 
           mechanics, something dear to physicists would be lost for good. Sci-
           entists like Planck and Einstein had made good use of Boltzmann’s 
           statistics, but for them it was always a heuristic. Whether with col-
           lisions of cue balls or gas molecules, they assumed that we needed 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   67                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           68              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           statistics because of technical limitations on our knowledge. If we 
           could focus our gaze to the scale of gas molecules, we could predict 
           their movements with the same precision we can for cue balls, and 
           thus lower accordingly our reliance on statistical models.
             At heart, physics was still deterministic. Actions led to reactions 
           in totally law- abiding ways. With Born’s move to bring in proba-
           bility,  something  changed  decisively.  As  he  wrote  in  his  paper  in 
           1926, in “quantum mechanics there exists no quantity in which an 
           individual  case  determines  the  results  of  a  collision.  .  .  .  I  myself 
           am  inclined  to  give  up  determinism  in  the  atomic  world.”41  Ein-
           stein wasn’t having any of it. His response to Born has been quoted, 
           requoted, and misquoted ad inﬁnitum (o.en by the great man him-
           self), but the gist was always the same. The imposing ediﬁce of quan-
           tum mechanics “delivers much but it hardly brings us closer to the 
           Old One’s secret. In any event, I am convinced that He is not playing 
           dice.”42 The laws of physics couldn’t come down to maybes; things 
           happened for a reason.


           %&1*&#(&-/ 1#$-'80:&8  $%&  18&" of  observation  in  the  very 
           ﬁrst sentences of the paper that put the new physics into motion. 
           “An attempt  is  made,” he  wrote  there, “to  obtain  foundations  for 
           quantum theoretical mechanics based exclusively on relationships 
           between quantities that are in principle observable.”43 At ﬁrst glance 
           uncontroversial, in fact a revolution is already at work in this state-
           ment. Just as Einstein twenty years earlier had decided to let go of 
           something everyone “knew”—that  time was the same for everyone, 
           that my “now” is the same as your “now”— Heisenberg was letting 
           go of the image we have of a coherent reality that exists indepen-
           dently of our observations of it. If it had stayed at that level, though, 
           Heisenberg’s  pronouncement  would  have  been  little  more  than 
           a  version  of  the  if-a-  tree- falls riddle  that  stands  in  some  people’s 
           minds for philosophical profundity. Heisenberg’s paper, the math 
           it contained, and the work to follow did something far more con-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   68                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Visualize This!                   69

           sequential.  They  put  forth  a  detailed  scientiﬁc  interpretation  of 
           experimental evidence that demonstrated the incoherence of that 
           commonplace understanding of reality.
              What is an observation? At its very minimum, any observation 
           entails something connecting two disparate moments in time and 
           space. As for Kant and Borges’s character Funes, a being who was 
           truly, exclusively saturated in a present moment wouldn’t be able 
           to observe anything at all. Observation, any observation, installs a 
           minimal distance from what it observes, for the simple reason that 
           for any observation to take place, one here and now must be related 
           to another here and now, and that relation needs to be registered by 
           some trace or connector between the two. Crucially, this aspect of 
           observing doesn’t assume a conscious or otherwise human agent. It 
           also doesn’t mean, as the popular misunderstanding of Heisenberg’s 
           discovery would have it, that the tools we use to observe something 
           always a7ect what we observe, although that too is true. Far more 
           fundamentally,  the  blur  of  the  instant  of  change  that  is  a  logical 
           prerequisite for stitching together any two moments in space- time 
           inextricably inheres in the very reality being observed. This, in a nut-
           shell, is the uncertainty principle: you can know a particle’s position 
           or its momentum, but you can’t know both.
              In a deep sense, then, the laws of physics, the laws that describe 
           how things behave, are really the laws of our observations of how 
           things behave. Or, as Heisenberg would later say, “we have to remem-
           ber that what we observe is not nature in itself but nature exposed to 
           our method of questioning.”44 And since an observation is always an 
           observation in time and space, the laws of physics regard operations 
           in time and space. We may speculate about the world outside the 
           conditions of time and space; indeed, as we will see in subsequent 
           chapters, generations of thinkers and theologians have tried to do 
           just that. But a nontemporal and nonspatial perspective obliterates 
           the very idea of an observation, and hence is incompatible with any 
           knowledge we can have of the world. In a fascinating and parallel 
           way, the two constants that form the backbone of modern physics, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   69                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           70              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Einstein’s c and Planck’s h, turn out to be fundamental limits built 
           into  the  fabric  of  our  observed  reality:  on  the  one  hand, a  speed 
           limit at which time comes to a standstill; on the other, a size limit 
           on how closely we can focus on the warp and we. of space- time.
             It was this second limit that Heisenberg unearthed, barely a year 
           later,  with  a  second  revolutionary  paper,  one  that  would  forever 
           bind his name to the idea of an ineradicable uncertainty at the heart 
           of our ability to know reality.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   70                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                            Part II

                                            NOT BEING GOD


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   71                                                                                                                         2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   72                                                                                                                         2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                       4

                          ENTANGLEMENTS


                   &1*&#(&-/  +"* (&*18& %19*&23. He  had  checked  and 
                   rechecked the math. He had exchanged letters with Pauli 
           Hand received his support. He had sent o7 the paper to Ger-
           many’s leading physics review, and it had been accepted. Naturally 
           Bohr was going to object. Of course he was going to poke and prod, 
           nitpick,  split  hairs.  But  ask  him  to  retract?  Take  more  time  to  be 
           sure of the conclusions? The young man’s obstinate streak took over. 
           No— hadn’t he allowed himself to be scooped by bowing to Som-
           merfeld’s skepticism about his half- integer idea? It was time to fol-
           low his instincts and move ahead.
              But then Bohr showed him something that let the air out of his 
           balloon. Heisenberg had made a mistake.
              It was a technical error, but Bohr was able to show that it went 
           to the heart of what they had been arguing about all this time. As 
           he expounded his newly derived uncertainty principle, Heisenberg 
           called upon the method he had started to develop while hiking with 
           his friends in the hills over Lake Starnberg: posing a problem with 
           mental images and then turning those into concepts. He began by 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   73                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           74              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           imagining how one might try to measure the position and momen-
           tum  of  an  electron  by  illuminating  it  with  the  smallest  possible 
           wavelength of energy, gamma rays, and then examining the results 
           of  their  collisions  with  a  gamma  ray  microscope  constructed  for 
           the experiment (“constructed” here means dreamed up). Homing 
           in on the electron with ever smaller wavelengths of energy to bet-
           ter measure its position, however, would cause ever greater recoil of 
           the particle— since smaller wavelengths equal higher energy— and 
           thus make its momentum harder to pin down.1 He also found that a 
           similar uncertainty held for the variables of energy and time. Just as 
           one could ﬁx position but only at the expense of losing any bearing 
           on momentum, the cost of knowing the exact time of a measure-
           ment le. one utterly in the dark as to its energy level.
             Even before this particular conﬂict, the stay in Copenhagen had 
           started  to  turn  south  as  Schrödinger’s  had.  Heisenberg  was  used 
           to  collaboration  and  conversation.  That’s  what  the  new  Göttin-
           gen physics had emerged from. The last year and a half had been 
           a dream, an extension of the Platonic Symposium of outings with 
           good friends that Heisenberg had turned to for solace since the des-
           perate postwar years in Munich. Heisenberg, Pauli, Pascual Jordan, 
           Born himself— they had all come from vastly di7erent backgrounds, 
           but  they  had  formed  a  community.  Their  di7erences  were  their 
           strength. Even when they disagreed— Pauli, for example, hated the 
           math they had come up with and stewed that “matrix must be about 
           the dumbest mathematical word ever invented!”—their  persistent 
           back- and- forth had led to exactly the kind of middle ground that 
           Heisenberg had dreamed of in the courtyard of Schloss Prunn.2
             Indeed, the Göttingen physics emerged from an almost camplike 
           life. The students spent almost all their time together— in seminars 
           of course, but also outside, skiing, hiking, and horseback riding. In 
           skiing Heisenberg was always the fastest. One day the friends took 
           the institute’s stopwatch, ostensibly intended for gathering experi-
           mental data, to the slopes with them to time their respective runs. 
           Werner tore down the slope at eighty kilometers per hour, as one of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   74                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     75

           his colleagues, Wilhelm Hanle, reported, “a record for that time.”3 
           (One suspects that if Hanle got the velocity exactly right, he might 
           not have known precisely where on the slope Heisenberg was.) Not 
           that physics was ever o7 the table— literally. In fact, at a certain point 
           the matronly café owner of their preferred lunch spot ﬂat out told 
           them they would no longer be welcome if they insisted on debat-
           ing physics at the top of their voices every day, which was simply 
           “becoming unbearable to the other guests.”4
              The time with Bohr had very much started in this spirit. They 
           would talk physics throughout the day in the institute until a.er 
           dinner, when, unsated, they would carry the conversations with them 
           up to Werner’s attic room until past midnight. As winter stretched 
           on, though, they began to run into dead ends in their conversations. 
           The decision to take some time with his wife in Norway was Bohr’s 
           way of getting some distance and allowing things to settle with his 
           newly prickly assistant. Then Werner had his ﬂash of insight, which 
           he  shared  with  Pauli,  whose  reaction  was  conclusive—“the  rosy 
           dawn of modernity. Daylight has come to quantum theory.”5
              Ecstatic over his discovery, Heisenberg was simply not prepared 
           for a new round of Bohrish skepticism upon his mentor’s return. 
           Heisenberg’s derivation of the uncertainty that obtained between 
           momentum and position, on the one hand, and between energy and 
           time, on the other, was both profound and accurate, but as an inter-
           pretation it was incomplete. The problem, Bohr insisted, was that 
           it failed to acknowledge the wave side of what Bohr was starting to 
           call an essential “complementarity” in quantum physics. Comple-
           mentarity, he said, referred to the ineluctable fact that both wave 
           and particle notions apply to quantum events, but that a physicist 
           can only ever choose to measure one.6 Heisenberg, with his gung ho 
           embrace of discontinuity (and likely his distaste for anything that 
           reminded him of Schrödinger and his damned waves), had failed to 
           see that any interpretation of a quantum event would be incomplete 
           without accounting for the fact that particles also behave like waves, 
           and that by choosing what to focus on, the observer was in essence 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   75                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           76              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           deciding what kind of outcome would emerge.
             Heisenberg did not react well, to say the least. He not only ﬂat 
           out refused to withdraw the paper but also was personally o7ended 
           that Bohr would pigeonhole his paper into a supporting role for his 
           own nascent theory. The battle raged on. Like Schrödinger before 
           him, Heisenberg felt harassed by Bohr’s incessant probing and was 
           even reduced to tears. Still, Bohr’s war of attrition ultimately pre-
           vailed, and in May 1927 a crestfallen Heisenberg agreed to amend 
           the paper by adding a postscript pointing out “essential points that 
           I  had  overlooked” and  crediting  Bohr  with  bringing  them  to  his 
           attention.7 Primary among these was the fact that uncertainty arises 
           not only from the fundamental discontinuity of reality at the quan-
           tum  level— that no  matter  how  closely  one  looked  at  a  particle’s 
           movement there was no way to close the gaps and ﬁnd a smooth 
           path— but from the fact that the observer always decides in advance 
           whether to look for a wave or a particle, and that decision deter-
           mines the reality one will ﬁnd.
             Détente shakily achieved, Heisenberg and Bohr could now ally 
           themselves to take on the rest of the physics world. Their interpreta-
           tions might have di7ered, but Heisenberg’s principle had emerged 
           unscathed. Whatever the tools we use, as we focus on reality at the 
           quantum level, we must make certain choices. We can zoom in on 
           an electron’s position or on its momentum. We can further deﬁne 
           the energy of an event or its time. But in each case, the more we 
           focus on one factor, the greater the uncertainty of the other. And 
           the value lodged in the pivot between one side and the other of his 
           equation was nothing other than our old friend Planck’s constant.


           "3$&- %&1*&#(&-/ 2&3$ :'!&#%"/&#  that summer, Bohr got to 
           work  articulating  as  best  he  could  the  philosophical  framework 
           within which the new quantum physics could make sense to the 
           outside world. He had several vital components to pack into one 
           coherent  picture— wave  particle  duality,  uncertainty,  and  also  the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   76                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     77

           strange fact that quantum mechanics could explain classical phys-
           ics, but not the reverse. No easy task for even the clearest thinker, 
           but Bohr’s penchant for murkiness threatened to make the situation 
           worse.
              At the end of the summer the theoretical physics world gathered 
           at a palazzo on the idyllic shores of Lake Como in northern Italy for 
           a conference marking the hundredth birthday of the Italian inventor 
           of the voltage cell, Alessandro Volta. There Bohr presented his theory 
           of complementarity publicly for the ﬁrst time. Heisenberg’s innova-
           tions  had  earned  pride  of  place:  discontinuity  was, Bohr  insisted, 
           the irreducible postulate of quantum physics.8 But he le. plenty of 
           room for Schrödinger as well. Speciﬁcally, Bohr noted that the two 
           relations in Heisenberg’s principle— on the one hand momentum 
           and position, on the other energy and time— each contained an ele-
           ment traditionally associated with particles and another associated 
           with waves. Taking a measurement therefore required choosing to 
           focus on either a wavelike or a particle-like  aspect of the quantum 
           event, at the exclusion of the other. And yet both aspects, mutually 
           exclusive for any act of observation, are necessarily part of the whole 
           picture.9  Hence  complementarity:  we  can  see  di7erent  aspects  of 
           reality, depending on what we choose to observe; and those aspects 
           complement each other; but we can never grasp the entirety of that 
           reality.
              Crucially,  while  Bohr  acknowledged  Schrödinger’s  waves,  his 
           theory obliterated everything Schrödinger’s had sought to achieve 
           with them. The wave equation is thoroughly classical. If you mea-
           sure a given system at a given time and calculate its wave function, 
           you will be able to calculate the same function later, with no uncer-
           tainty. The problem arises when you take a measurement prior to 
           that later time. In classical mechanics, such a measurement doesn’t 
           alter the wave. In quantum mechanics, by taking that measurement, 
           you have changed the future outcome of the wave function.10
              The audience members at Como weren’t knocked o7 their seats. 
           Many thought Bohr might just be saying something they already 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   77                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           78              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           understood:  if  you  measure  something,  you’re  going  to  interfere 
           with  what  you’re  measuring.  But  Bohr’s  point  was  far  more  pro-
           found.  Heisenberg’s  principle  showed  that  with  quantum  events 
           taking a measurement decisively determined what one could know 
           about the whole system. In some very deep sense, the measurements 
           themselves  determined  the  world  they  sought  to  measure.11  This 
           went against the very ﬁber of what Schrödinger, and through him 
           Einstein, believed about the ultimate nature of reality.
             As  Bohr  concluded  his  talk  that  day,  Born  and  Heisenberg  in 
           turn  rose  from  their  seats  and  publicly  endorsed  his  position. 
           Because it was Bohr’s lecture, and much of its grist had been worked 
           out at his institute, their imprimatur sealed what became known 
           as  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics—with  
           Bohr’s theory of complementarity as the philosophical framework 
           that held Heisenberg’s matrix mechanics, his uncertainty principle, 
           and Born’s probabilistic application of the wave equation together 
           in one rather incoherent bundle. When a version of Bohr’s lecture 
           ﬁnally appeared the following year in the journal Nature, the editors 
           openly hoped that it would not be physicists’ “last word on the sub-
           ject, and that they may yet be successful in expressing the quantum 
           postulate in picturesque form.”12
             They weren’t the only ones. Neither Einstein nor Schrödinger 
           had come to Como. But in only a few weeks they would be ready to 
           take a ﬁrst shot at dismantling the Copenhagen juggernaut.


           1# 4B44 $%& (&2/1"# industrialist  Ernest  Solvay  had  invited  the 
           most prominent scientists in the world to a conference in Brussels 
           to share their thinking on the state of the art in chemistry and phys-
           ics. In the wake of the resounding success of the gathering, Solvay 
           founded the International Solvay Institutes for Physics and Chemis-
           try, which made the meetings a regular a7air, holding them roughly 
           every three years ever since with notable gaps around the world wars. 
           In October 1927, the physics world converged for what would end 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   78                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     79

           up being perhaps the most remarkable gathering of physicists of all 
           time. The last time the conference had taken place was just a.er the 
           end of World War I and German scientists had been barred. Ein-
           stein, who was traveling in the United States at the time, declined 
           the invitation in protest. But this year he was slated to come, along 
           with pretty much every other major ﬁgure in the ﬁeld. The confer-
           ence’s theme was “Electrons and Photons,” but for all intents and 
           purposes it was quantum mechanics.
              The air in the meeting rooms at the Hotel Métropole in Brus-
           sels shimmered in anticipation of the encounter between Einstein 
           and the young brigade of the quantum revolution. At ﬁrst, however, 
           Einstein demurred. He decided against giving the opening lecture, 
           telling his colleagues that he had concluded, “I am not competent 
           to give such a report in a way that would match the current state 
           of a7airs.”13 Earlier that year he had prepared a paper advancing a 
           wave interpretation of quantum events but had withdrawn it.14 He 
           had been corresponding with Heisenberg, and it might have been 
           that uncertainty was turning out to be a hard obstacle to overcome. 
           For  his  part, Schrödinger  did  give  a  paper. It  didn’t  land  particu-
           larly well, and he found himself ill- equipped to respond to the sharp 
           questioning that rained in from Heisenberg and Born.
              The  Copenhagen  team  had  come  prepared.  Heisenberg  and 
           Born worked together as a team and delivered a joint paper, which 
           began by throwing a gauntlet, saying, “We regard quantum mechanics 
           as a complete theory for which the fundamental physical and math-
           ematical hypotheses are no longer susceptible of modiﬁcation.”15 As 
           if  this  hadn’t  driven  the  point  home,  they  further  speciﬁed  what 
           they meant by complete. Quantum theory, they declared, “is distin-
           guished essentially from classical physics by the existence of disconti-
           nuities,” and “the subsequent development of the theory of radiation 
           will  change  nothing  in  this  state  of  a7airs.”16  The  gist? “Our  fun-
           damental hypothesis of essential indeterminism is in accord with 
           experiment.”17 To use a present- day idiom, quantum mechanics was 
           complete because the indeterminism of the behavior of individual 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   79                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           80              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           particles was not a bug but a feature. It was baked into how reality 
           behaves at the smallest level, and no amount of digging was going 
           to relieve science of that apparent paradox.
             With Heisenberg and Born showing little mood to compromise 
           and the rest of the Copenhagenites, as Pauli would call them, cir-
           cling the wagons, it was le. to their spiritual leader to play the diplo-
           mat, a role for which the congenial Niels Bohr was particularly well 
           suited— especially given how hard it is to strenuously disagree with 
           someone you don’t understand. While Einstein mainly listened dur-
           ing the presentations, a strange dance developed between the two of 
           them at the meals that preceded and followed the scheduled lectures. 
           Each morning a small crowd would settle in around a table where 
           Bohr  and  Einstein  sat  speaking,  and  Einstein  would  pose  Bohr  a 
           problem. Typically, this problem would take the form of a thought 
           experiment— the genre of which Einstein was the undisputed mas-
           ter. Bohr would puzzle and fret and then rush o7 to confer with 
           Heisenberg and Born, while Einstein would lean back with a satis-
           ﬁed smile on his face. By evening, though, the tables would turn, as 
           an ebullient Bohr would point out a vital detail that Einstein had 
           overlooked, and indeterminism would be restored.18
             True  to  Einstein’s  style,  even  as  he  lost  these  skirmishes,  his 
           thought experiments lay bare the essence of the problem. Ironically, 
           one of the problems he presented would eventually become a real 
           experiment whose results conclusively demonstrated the reality of 
           quantum “weirdness.” Imagine, Einstein proposed, a screen with two 
           slits at which a gun ﬁres a stream of electrons. On the other side is 
           a photographic plate that registers the pattern formed by the elec-
           trons as they pass through. As is well known, when waves hit such a 
           barrier, they form an interference pattern on the plate, with lighter 
           and darker strips representing where the new waves emerging from 
           the two slits augment and diminish each other. Particles, if they are 
           shot  through  one  by  one  and  are  not  able  to  interfere  with  each 
           other as they pass through one or the other slit, should produce a 
           pattern of two stripes on the plate.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   80                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     81

              If the Copenhagenites were correct and quantum mechanics was 
           indeed the last word, Einstein said, as electrons pass through the slit, 
           they pass through as elements of a probability wave, not a real wave; 
           in other words, whatever wavelike pattern appears only accrues over 
           time and as a result of many electrons passing through. This would 
           be true even if the electrons passed through one a.er the other, since 
           the wave of their probability would supposedly interfere with itself 
           to  create  a  wavelike  pattern  on  the  photographic  plate.  However, 
           taken as an individual particle, each time an electron hits the plate 
           and  is  registered,  and  hence  a  measurement  has  taken  place,  the 
           probability that the same electron hits anywhere else on the plate 
           would instantaneously collapse to zero. The electron, upon being 
           measured in one place, would somehow, instantaneously, transmit 
           this fact to all the other places it could have been. And this, Ein-
           stein triumphantly claimed, was impossible, because it would entail 
           the instantaneous communication of information across an (admit-
           tedly minuscule) expanse of space and time. It would violate a well- 
           established and proven bedrock of physics, namely, Einstein’s own 
           theory of special relativity, which put an absolute limit, the speed of 
           light, on how fast information can be propagated. For Einstein, the 
           interpretation of a probability wave instantaneously communicat-
           ing its measurement across any expanse of space violated the theory 
           of relativity’s ban on faster- than- light communication, and this fact 
           proved something was missing from the quantum mechanics pic-
           ture.19 For according to relativity, it is simply impossible that a deci-
           sion in one place instantaneously a7ects the rest of reality. But that’s 
           exactly what quantum theory’s most fundamental insights implied.
              Einstein beamed. Measuring a particle could not be responsible 
           for determining its pathway, as Heisenberg had famously insisted. 
           Instead,  it  must  be  the  case  that  the  decision  was  already  made: 
           the particles showed up when they were measured, yes, but as they 
           passed through the slits, they passed through the way real waves do, 
           not as probabilities to be later resolved. And these real waves would 
           be deterministic in a classical way. Quantum mechanics was incom-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   81                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           82              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           plete because it hadn’t yet found a way to see with precision where 
           the particles were or the form they took before they struck the plate.


           :%"-":$&-1*$1:"22,, ('%-’* "#*+&- 2"$&- that evening came in 
           the form of an interrogation of Einstein’s assumptions. Didn’t his 
           conclusion fail to account for the uncertainty principle? Einstein’s 
           claim that information about an electron’s path couldn’t travel faster 
           than the speed of light took for granted how much information we 
           could have about the situation. In fact, exact knowledge of a par-
           ticle’s position in space and time requires wildly inexact knowledge 
           of its momentum and energy, rendering impossible the reduction 
           to zero of its previous possible trajectories. In any real experiment, 
           the equipment used for making the measurement—in  this case the 
           screen  receiving  the  electrons— would  itself  register  vanishingly 
           small movements that would reinstall some uncertainty in the posi-
           tion and time of the electron’s impact. This in turn would allow 
           for calculating the probability of where it might have been with an 
           exactness in proportion to that permitted by Heisenberg’s equation. 
           If one wanted to know more about the path taken by the electron, 
           one could measure that and determine which slit it passed through, 
           at which point, however, the experimenter would have opted to mea-
           sure it as a particle and the di7raction pattern would no longer form 
           on the screen. There was simply no way to get an electron to give 
           you both sides of the equation in full, and therefore Einstein’s com-
           plaint that quantum theory violated relativity because it assumed 
           the instantaneous transmission of information was unwarranted.20


           ('%-’* -&*!'#*&  $' &1#*$&1# sounds  like  a  cop- out.  Indeed, 
           Einstein was likely quite nonplussed by it at the time. The whole 
           point he was trying to make is that quantum mechanics can’t be 
           the whole picture, because, as he said in his address on the last day 
           of the conference, “in my opinion it contradicts the relativity postu-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   82                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     83

           late.”21 Bohr’s response was simply to double down on the limited 
           nature of our knowledge of quantum events and insist that because 
           of Heisenberg’s principle quantum mechanics was the last word. No 
           matter how you tweaked it, you weren’t going to get more informa-
           tion from tiny particles than Heisenberg’s math allowed.
              Einstein possessed a strength that Bohr did not. Whether ulti-
           mately  right  or  wrong,  he  was  able  to  make  things  clear.  In  this 
           case,  what  Einstein  beautifully  clariﬁed  was  this:  either  quantum 
           mechanics was right about the real indeterminacy of an electron’s 
           path until the moment of its measurement, or it was not. If it was 
           not right, then physics remained deterministic, even if the knowl-
           edge of those determinations was for now, or forever, beyond our 
           grasp. If quantum mechanics was right, however, then our funda-
           mental  understanding  of  reality  had  been  misguided  until  now. 
           Bohr’s protests notwithstanding, an observation taken at one point 
           in  space  and  time  would  indeed  appear  to  instantaneously  a7ect 
           what we know about another point in space and time, thus violat-
           ing a principle decisively proven by relativity. This principle is called 
           locality. What we can know about the world around us is limited 
           by the velocity of light. I simply cannot know what is happening 
           “now” at any distance from me, because information takes a certain 
           minimum of time to cross any spatial distance, and it cannot do so 
           faster. Period. If it does, then all bets are o7. Not only can an observa-
           tion a7ect other points in space-time  simultaneously; worse yet, an 
           observation could retroactively determine what path a particle took 
           to get to that observation. This made no sense at all.
              The two- slit experiment has now been performed over and over 
           again. Here is what happens. A stream of electrons ﬁred at a screen 
           with two slits produces a wavelike interference pattern on the plate 
           behind it. Bizarrely, the pattern remains even when you slow the rate 
           of emission down so much that only one electron can be passing 
           through the screen at a time. While each electron lands at a deﬁnite 
           spot, as you run the experiment over time and allow thousands to 
           land on the screen, they will accumulate exactly according to a wave 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   83                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           84              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           pattern, as if the two slits had been set up in a tankful of water and 
           the little waves emerging out the back end combined to form pat-
           terns of ampliﬁcation and cancellation. In other words, while logic 
           dictates  that  each  electron  must  have  passed  through  one  or  the 
           other hole, over time they behave as if what had passed through the 
           holes were ghosts, potential particles, amplifying or canceling each 
           other along the way, thus producing the pattern.
             Even more eerily, you can change the experiment by placing a 
           detector at each slit to record which one the electrons pass through 
           on their way to the screen. Now the interference pattern disappears 
           and what you are le. with is a pattern produced by a bunch of par-
           ticles behaving like particles. In other words, once they have been 
           caught in the act of passing through one or the other slit, they stop 
           behaving like ghosts or potentialities and go on about their business 
           as self- respecting particles.22 This doesn’t only seem to violate local-
           ity; it violates common sense.
             Einstein continued to pepper Bohr and the Copenhagen contin-
           gent with questions in the years a.er the 1927 meeting, including 
           three years later when they again returned to Brussels for the next 
           iteration of the Solvay conference. On that occasion Einstein took 
           aim at Heisenberg’s principle directly, and this time he let ﬂy a real 
           humdinger. Imagine, he said to Bohr, a box equipped with a scale to 
           measure its weight— something like a spring scale, but of course sen-
           sitive to absurdly small changes. The box has a trapdoor controlled 
           by a very fast shutter, which can open and shut quickly enough to 
           allow one photon at a time to escape. If you record the departure of 
           a photon at an exact time and then weigh the box, comparing the 
           mass of its contents before and a.er the light beam le., you will 
           know both the time of the event and the energy, since, according 
           to Einstein’s famous equivalence, mass is convertible to energy. And 
           this would be a violation of Heisenberg’s principle, which explicitly 
           states that one cannot know with precision both the energy and the 
           time of a quantum event.23
             Those  at  the  event  recall  Bohr’s  agitation  that  evening  as  he 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   84                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     85

           obsessed  over  Einstein’s  problem  at  dinner,  bringing  it  up  to 
           everyone who came to the table, and repeatedly going back to Ein-
           stein to ask questions and insist that he couldn’t be right. Einstein, 
           for his part, looked like the cat that had eaten the canary. When he 
           descended  for  breakfast  the  following  morning,  though,  Einstein 
           would eat crow instead. For in the night Bohr had landed on what 
           was wrong with the scenario. Einstein had forgotten to consider his 
           own theory of relativity, which also stated that the recoil of the box 
           when it lost the energy of the photon necessarily a7ected the time 
           of the event. In minuscule ways, of course. But because the entire 
           experiment was set up to measure such small events, even this tiny 
           adjustment reintroduced uncertainty— at exactly the degree calcu-
           lated by Heisenberg. It seemed that no matter how Einstein tried 
           to  show  the  ﬂaws  in  quantum  mechanics, Heisenberg’s  principle 
           always got in the way.
              A.er the 1930 Solvay conference Einstein seemed to accept that 
           he wasn’t going to get around the uncertainty principle by conjuring 
           imagined physical devices. Bohr always seemed to ﬁnd a way to show 
           how measurements involving devices that had to be described with 
           classical physics would register minute changes, and these changes 
           would have comparatively large e7ects at the quantum level. The 
           reason for this seemed to have something to do with Bohr’s notion 
           of  complementarity,  “the  sharp  formulation  of  which,”  Einstein 
           would complain, “I have been unable to achieve despite much e7ort 
           which I have expended on it.”24 This fact did not alter Einstein’s con-
           viction that something had to be missing. If Heisenberg’s principle 
           was a limit on how far down we could see the quantum world, that 
           didn’t mean that the quantum world didn’t still work in accordance 
           with the laws of classical physics. The Copenhagen interpretation, 
           though, insisted that these particles had no determinate path in real-
           ity until they were measured, and this just could not be right.


           1# $%& 31-*$ ,&"-* of  the  1930s  Einstein’s  life  was  upended  by 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   85                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           86              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Hitler’s rise in Germany. In December 1932 he and his wife, Elsa, 
           departed  Germany  for  the  United  States,  a.er  initial  di<culties 
           securing a visa, ostensibly because of his le.ist views. The incident 
           caused some embarrassment for the U.S. government, with The New 
           York Times reporting on the various states of Einstein’s packing and 
           unpacking of his bags, and led to an o<cial apology from Secretary 
           of State Henry Stimson, who insisted to the press that Einstein “was 
           treated with every courtesy and consideration.”25 When Hitler took 
           power at the end of the following month, Einstein had made it as 
           far as California, where he stayed until March. There he did an inter-
           view with a reporter from the New York World- Telegram in which he 
           stated, “As long as I have any choice in the matter, I shall live only 
           in a country where civil liberty, tolerance and equality of all citizens 
           before the law prevail. . . . These conditions do not exist in Germany 
           at the present time.”26
             The following day, as a powerful earthquake rocked Los Ange-
           les, Einstein le. by train for the East Coast. His apartment in Ber-
           lin would soon be torn apart by brown- shirted thugs, and Einstein 
           would never return to Germany. Instead, he would accept an invita-
           tion at the newly founded Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, 
           New Jersey, for what he thought would be half a year or so. He stayed 
           until his death more than twenty years later.
             Before moving to Princeton, Einstein returned to Europe long 
           enough to o<cially renounce his German citizenship at the consul-
           ate in Brussels. There he attended a lecture by a physicist named 
           Léon Rosenfeld who was working as Bohr’s assistant at the time. 
           A.er Rosenfeld’s lecture ended, Einstein rose and, somewhat like 
           Socrates asking one of his apparently simple questions, painted this 
           scenario: “Suppose  two  particles  are  set  in  motion  towards  each 
           other with the same, very large, momentum.”27 So began a thought 
           experiment  that  would  ultimately  constitute  Einstein’s  last  best 
           e7ort to dismantle the Copenhagen interpretation. While it would 
           fail to do so, it would set in motion a series of experiments and dis-
           coveries over the next half century that would prove beyond a doubt 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   86                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     87

           the profound weirdness of the quantum world.
              The  thought  experiment  would  take  its  full  form  two  years 
           later. Now comfortably settled in Princeton, Einstein collaborated 
           with  two  colleagues  there,  Boris  Podolsky  and  Nathan  Rosen, 
           to  write  a  paper  whose  title  e7ectively  broadcast  its  thesis: “Can 
           Quantum- Mechanical  Description  of  Physical  Reality  Be  Consid-
           ered Complete?” The EPR paper, as it came to be known, landed in 
           Copenhagen like a bomb. Rosenfeld later recalled, “This onslaught 
           came down upon us as a bolt from the blue.”28 Pauli wrote franti-
           cally to Heisenberg, calling the paper “a catastrophe.”29
              In  simple  terms,  the  paper  picked  up  on  Einstein’s  objection 
           from 1927, further clarifying the stakes. The two particles in ques-
           tion would collide and rebound in opposite directions. Assuming 
           they  were  undisturbed  in  their  ﬂight,  the  particles  could  travel 
           very  far  from  each  other  indeed.  If,  however,  a  scientist  captured 
           and measured one of them, according to quantum mechanics and 
           Heisenberg’s principle, he or she would be able to know either its 
           position or its momentum with great accuracy. So far so good. How-
           ever, Heisenberg had also supposedly shown that the particle has no 
           momentum or position until it is observed. And there was the rub. In 
           observing one particle, the researcher would instantaneously know 
           the position or momentum of the other particle, no matter how far 
           the distance between them; even worse, by observing the one, the 
           scientist would also instantaneously determine the outcome of any 
           observation of the second. As Einstein had asked Rosenfeld at his 
           lecture, “How can the ﬁnal state of the second particle be inﬂuenced 
           by a measurement performed on the ﬁrst?”30 Einstein had driven a 
           stake through the heart of what he called spooky action at a distance 
           in 1915 when he redeﬁned gravity as the curvature of space-time.  
           Now  here  it  was  poking  its  head  up  again.  Einstein  just  knew  it 
           couldn’t be right.
              The  Copenhagenites  again  closed  ranks.  Heisenberg  dra.ed  a 
           response, but ﬁnally deferred to Bohr to publish the o<cial rejoin-
           der. The paper— which jauntily sported the same title as the origi-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   87                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           88              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           nal  EPR  paper  but  this  time  with  the  presumed  answer  in  the 
           a<rmative— turned the tables on Einstein and company by assert-
           ing that it wasn’t the outcome that couldn’t be right, but rather its 
           underlying  assumption  of  what  reality  must  be  like.  The  authors 
           had imported an unjustiﬁed idea about reality into their thinking: 
           namely, that reality existed, independent of measurements, in a visu-
           alizable form.31 EPR thought that spooky action at a distance must 
           mean the theory was wrong; Bohr responded rather cheekily that 
           “the apparent contradiction in fact discloses only an essential inad-
           equacy of the customary viewpoint of natural philosophy.”32 If real-
           ity seemed in conﬂict with quantum mechanics, then too bad for 
           reality.
             Einstein wasn’t the only one who, in trying to show how quan-
           tum  mechanics  couldn’t  be  the  whole  picture,  ended  up  clarify-
           ing  the  stakes.  Schrödinger  was  following  the  controversy  quite 
           closely as well. Later that year he published a response of his own 
           that would win Einstein’s approval and go on to become the most 
           memorable  version  of  the  paradoxes  sprouting  from  quantum 
           mechanics. In his famous scenario Schrödinger describes a “hellish 
           contraption” consisting of a box, some radioactive material, a Gei-
           ger counter, a vial of cyanide, and an unsuspecting cat.33 According 
           to quantum mechanics, much as an electron cannot be said to be 
           taking a speciﬁc path until it is measured, a radioactive substance 
           with  a  50  percent  chance  of  emitting  a  particle  over  a  period  of 
           time cannot be said to have emitted or not until it is observed. As a 
           result, the wave function of its emission will hover in a superposi-
           tion of those states, emitted and non- emitted, until an observation 
           takes place. The gist of the paper involved setting up the experiment 
           (thought experiment of course, no cats were harmed) such that the 
           indeterminacy of the quantum world would have real stakes in the 
           world governed by classical physics. The Geiger counter would be 
           set to trigger a hammer that would crack open the vial of poison 
           when it detected an emission. If the event couldn’t be said to have 
           occurred until the box was opened and the cat observed, this would 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   88                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     89

           mean that the cat would have to exist in the box in an in-between  
           state— in Schrödinger’s  words  (for  which  he  begged  the  reader’s 
           pardon), “mixed or smeared out” between life and death.34
              Schrödinger had no problem with the idea that quantum events 
           could  be  connected  to  one  another  or  to  classical  apparatuses  in 
           determinative or causal ways. He even coined the term we use today 
           for talking about such relations: “entanglement,” the relation that 
           develops when the two particles in Einstein’s original scenario col-
           lide. As he wrote, “Entanglement of predictions arises from the fact 
           that the two bodies at some earlier time formed in a true sense one 
           system, that is they were interacting, and have le. behind traces on 
           each other.”35 What he contested and thought absurd was the idea 
           that just measuring a system could cause it to take the form it has. 
           The cat is entangled with the emission of the particle, but it is either 
           dead or alive from the moment the vial breaks, just as the two par-
           ticles are in fact in motion with speciﬁc trajectories and speeds until 
           one  of  them  is  measured.  When  we  measure,  we  learn  what  was 
           already there; we don’t produce it. That is reality.
              It took until 1982 for a team of researchers at the University of 
           Paris- South led by the physicist Alain Aspect (who shared the 2022 
           Nobel Prize for his work) to demonstrate conclusively if Schrödinger 
           and Einstein were right, and this entanglement represents a kind 
           of hidden state that is only revealed by measurement and not pro-
           duced by it— that is, if reality at the subatomic level could be said to 
           exist on its own, independent of observations— or if Heisenberg’s 
           theory  that  observations  determine  the  underlying  reality  would 
           ultimately prevail.
              Unfortunately  for  reality,  their  experiment  proved  Heisenberg 
           right.


           &1#*$&1#’* &#$"#/2&9&#$  &E!&-19&#$  %"8 some  serious  legs. 
           Mostly pursued by physicists who wanted to conﬁrm his position, 
           the idea was reﬁned by people like David Bohm in the 1950s, and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   89                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           90              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           his student John Bell in the decades a.er, and eventually carried out 
           with  greater  and  greater  accuracy,  and  increasingly  unambiguous 
           results, in the 1980s and 1990s. Whether one is measuring the polar-
           ization of entangled light beams or the “spins” of entangled particles, 
           two ineluctable facts remained: the speciﬁc attributes of the pho-
           tons and particles are indeterminate until measured; and measuring 
           one particle seems to decide the value of the other instantaneously, 
           in apparent violation of special relativity’s ban on faster- than- light 
           communication— also demonstrating, not incidentally, that Bohr’s 
           objection in Brussels, while e7ective, was ultimately an obfuscation 
           of the debate rather than a true winning shot.
             Einstein’s  hope  had  always  been  that  scientists  would  eventu-
           ally learn that this knowledge about the distant particle or photon 
           would turn out to be no more mysterious than, say, opening one 
           of two boxes in which a single ball might have been placed. As he 
           put it in a letter to Schrödinger, if we place one ball in one of two 
           identical  boxes  and  mix  them  up, “the  probability  is  1/2  that  the 
           ball is in the ﬁrst box. Is that a complete description? no: A com-
           plete statement is: the ball is (or is not) in the ﬁrst box.”36 To Bell’s 
           chagrin, the ingenious experiments he designed to help prove Ein-
           stein’s conviction that the quantum “ball” was always there in the 
           box, as opposed to existing in a ghostlike intermediate state until 
           measured, ended up propping up Bohr and Heisenberg’s quantum 
           egg instead. Bell would later confess his disappointment in quite 
           personal terms: “I feel that Einstein’s intellectual superiority over 
           Bohr, in this instance, was enormous; a vast gulf between the man 
           who saw clearly what was needed, and the obscurantist. So for me, it 
           is a pity that Einstein’s idea doesn’t work. The reasonable thing just 
           doesn’t work.”37
             Bell’s experiments had involved the likelihood of measuring par-
           ticles with certain spin. In very simple form, if the spins were indeed 
           already  there— balls that  had  always  been  in  boxes, as  it  were—a  
           certain statistical pattern should emerge in the form of an “inequal-
           ity” among measured outcomes. You might think of this expected 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   90                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     91

           inequality as the outcome you would expect from rolling a pair of 
           dice many times and then tracking the number of times a certain 
           sum shows up. The numbers two and twelve should appear with 
           far less frequency than six or seven, for instance, because there are 
           fewer ways to make those sums. If, on the contrary, two and twelve 
           popped up as o.en as six did, you would suspect something ﬁshy is 
           going on. In the case of Bell’s experiments, if quantum mechanics 
           was right and the act of measurement forced the particles to assume 
           certain states, the inequalities one would expect from uncovering 
           preexisting but hidden spins would be violated.38
              As  it  happened,  experimental  data  in  the  1970s  were  already 
           accumulating that Bell’s inequalities were violated and those values 
           were not simply hidden in their quantum boxes, waiting to be dis-
           covered, but instead actively produced by the measurements. But in 
           1982 the Aspect experiment sealed the deal by adding an ingenious 
           bar for quantum mechanics to clear. In this experiment, one of two 
           entangled  light  beams  would  be  randomly  polarized  by  a  switch 
           a"er it le. its source, and hence a.er separating from its entangled 
           pair. The result was explosive. Bell’s inequalities were violated even 
           when light beams were randomly altered a.er leaving their source. 
           Quantum  entities  remain  indeterminate  until  they  are  measured, 
           and  measuring  them  seems  to  be  able  to  change  their  entangled 
           pairs even across distances, in apparent violation of relativity. It was 
           like a kind of magic trick, as one commentator pointed out. It was 
           as if twins always managed to order a di7erent drink no matter what 
           bar they were in and how far apart the bars were. “If one says, ‘Beer,’ 
           the  other  instantaneously  says, ‘Whiskey.’ ”39  And  to  make  matters 
           even more mysterious, you could change one twin’s order in the act 
           of ordering and, lo and behold, the other twin’s order would change 
           as well.
              As magical as they sound, entangled particles are real. In a series 
           of experiments since the early years of the twenty- ﬁrst century, the 
           Austrian physicist Anton Zeilinger (who just shared the 2022 Nobel 
           Prize with Aspect and John Clauser for their experimental conﬁrma-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   91                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           92              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           tions of entanglement) has managed to entangle larger and larger 
           particles and keep them entangled for greater and greater distances. 
           In 2004 he used entangled photons to create an unbreakable code 
           and secure the transfer of three thousand euros from one account to 
           another.40 In 2007 he sent entangled particles from one of the Span-
           ish Canary Islands across an expanse of open air to another island, 
           some eighty- nine miles away.41 Entangled particles called qubits pro-
           vide the beating heart of the emerging industry of quantum com-
           puting, which promises to exponentially increase processing power 
           in the near future. And yet the way measurement seems to violate 
           not only the speed of light but the direction of time and causality 
           can’t help but strike us as deeply paradoxical. What can explain it?
             Perhaps  we  need  to  think  of  the  paradox  in  a  di7erent  way 
           entirely.  As  the  Nobel  laureate  and  creator  of  the  ﬁeld  of  quan-
           tum electrodynamics Richard Feynman once wrote, “The ‘paradox’ 
           is only a conﬂict between reality and your feeling of what reality 
           ‘ought to be.’ ”42 As it turns out, this is a succinct statement of some-
           thing Werner Heisenberg had been saying all along.


           '# $%& &;&#1#/ '3 January 30, 1933, Hitler had just taken con-
           trol of the German government. Heisenberg was visiting the fam-
           ily home of his student and eventual lifelong friend, Carl Friedrich 
           von  Weizsäcker.  The  two  of  them  looked  out  at  streets  from  the 
           front  of  Weizsäcker’s  home  as  rows  of  brown- shirted  young  men 
           marched by in unison. As the troops’ torches cast ﬂickering shadows 
           over the cobblestones, the scientists exchanged worried glances and 
           wondered aloud what the changing political winds would mean for 
           their country’s future.43
             They didn’t need to wait too long. Within a month the Reichstag 
           had burned, duly blamed on a communist interloper, leading to the 
           appointment of Reich commissars dedicated to ensuring “order and 
           security” in each of the German states.44 The regime declared a boy-
           cott of Jewish- owned business on April 1 and soon therea.er began 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   92                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     93

           enacting  laws  limiting  Jews  in  the  civil  service  and  universities.45 
           Heisenberg  joined  other  respectable  non- Jewish  Germans  in  dis-
           daining the “excesses” of the brutal new regime, but stopped short of 
           open criticism, and indeed as late as the following fall would express 
           cautious optimism about the Nazis’ “good intentions.”46
              Such naïveté, not to say bad faith, can’t help but shock us today, 
           but it was widespread among the non- Jewish professional classes at 
           the time. Heisenberg, Planck, and many others in the top echelons 
           of  the  German  scientiﬁc  establishment  hoped  that  the  political 
           upheaval would be short-lived  and that they and their Jewish col-
           leagues would be spared due to the high social standing conferred 
           on professors, as well as the sterling reputation German physics held 
           in the world. They underestimated the deep- seated class antagonism 
           of the Nazi ideology, which despised intellectualism and science in 
           equal measure.
              The short- term goal of the non- Jewish scientists was to prevent 
           the regime from dismissing their Jewish colleagues— or, when, as 
           was o.en the case, this had already occurred, to try to dissuade those 
           colleagues from leaving the country while they worked behind the 
           scenes  to  reverse  those  decisions. Heisenberg’s  own  former  direc-
           tor, Max Born, le. for Italy a.er being placed on indeﬁnite leave 
           by the Göttingen administration. At ﬁrst he vowed never to return, 
           but he vacillated a.er Heisenberg wrote to him in June 1933 that 
           Planck had spoken with “the head of the government and obtained 
           the assurance that nothing will be undertaken beyond the new civil 
           service law that will impede our science.”47 Planck had indeed had 
           an audience with Hitler, but records are far from clear about what 
           actually transpired in the meeting, with Planck later recalling that 
           Hitler ﬁrst denied having anything against Jews and then ﬂew into 
           a rage at the venerable scientist.48
              For his part, the Austrian Schrödinger felt none of Heisenberg 
           and Planck’s loyalty to Germany. He exited his position in Berlin at 
           the end of the summer to take up a position at Oxford. A few years 
           later he would move back to Austria to teach at the University of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   93                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           94              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Graz— which o7ered the dual beneﬁt of not having Nazis, at least 
           for the time being, while also being the abode of his current mistress, 
           the wife of a colleague, with whom he had a daughter.49 He would 
           stay in Graz until Hitler annexed Austria in 1938, at which point 
           he moved permanently to the University of Dublin. Having long 
           considered Schrödinger a rival, Heisenberg was particularly stung 
           by his decision, wondering aloud about the defection of a scientist 
           who was “neither Jewish nor otherwise endangered.”50 Planck, for 
           his part, struck a more diplomatic note, lamenting “Schrödinger’s 
           resignation as a new deep wound to our Berlin physics.”51
             Neither man seemed to grasp yet that Hitler’s rise was a tragedy 
           not  just  for  German  science  but  for  humanity.  The  fact  was  that 
           Heisenberg represented a branch of physics that the Nazis found 
           especially tainted by its association with Jewish scientists like Born 
           and Einstein, the latter of whom unsparingly used his massive pub-
           lic platform to publicly eviscerate the new regime. For their quiet 
           e7orts to defend quantum mechanics and Jewish scientists, Heisen-
           berg  and  Planck  had  been  labeled “white  Jews”  and  blacklisted. 
           Their e7orts to place Heisenberg at the helm of Göttingen’s insti-
           tute and try to restore its former glory failed in the face of a rising 
           torrent of public criticism from regime o<cials intended to deprive 
           Heisenberg of any open academic chair. This continued even a.er 
           he was notiﬁed, in November 1933, that he had been awarded the 
           previous year’s Nobel Prize. Two days later he refused to participate 
           in a Nazi rally organized by students on his Leipzig campus, leaving 
           the  students  befuddled  and  engaging  in  contradictory  actions:  at 
           ﬁrst marching into his classroom to disrupt his lecture in protest, 
           and a few days later feting the newly minted laureate in typical Nazi 
           style, with a torchlight march.52
             The  following  August  the  regime  enacted  a  requirement  for 
           all civil servants to sign a personal pledge of allegiance to Hitler if 
           they  wished  to  keep  their  positions. In  January  1935, Heisenberg 
           signed the pledge, although he would continue to be quietly criti-
           cal and protest the regime’s excesses from the inside. As he wrote to 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   94                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     95

           his mother in the fall of 1935, “I must be satisﬁed to oversee in the 
           small ﬁeld of science the values that must become important for the 
           future. The world out there is really ugly, but the work is beautiful.”53
              For Heisenberg the beautiful work, like a violinist’s melliﬂuous 
           cadences ﬂoating down to calm the tumult of political strife, had 
           become the anchor for his belief in that middle ground, a truth that 
           exceeds  any  one  person  or  party’s  grasp  because  it  can  and  must 
           emerge  from  dialogue,  relationships.  Perhaps  it  exceeded  Heisen-
           berg’s own grasp that sometimes the pull of one person or party’s 
           version  of  reality  is  so  powerful,  so  poisonous,  it  can  corrupt  an 
           entire people— even a people capable of producing a beauty like 
           that of Bach’s music, like that of the science Heisenberg so wished 
           to protect. Perhaps it escaped his grasp that there are times when the 
           draw of a single, perverse belief is so strong that no sonata, no mat-
           ter how lovely, can break its spell.
              Scholars writing today o.en puzzle over the apparent mismatch 
           between the courageous, boundary- breaking nature of Heisenberg’s 
           science and the cautious, passive tone of his political engagements. 
           But perhaps the two attitudes are less divergent than they appear at 
           ﬁrst blush. In his science Heisenberg was willing to disregard the 
           unquestioned certainty of a reality that existed beyond individual 
           acts of observation and the interpretive e7orts that link them. What 
           this translated into in practice was a kind of preternatural patience 
           with trying things out, a let’s-wait-and-  see attitude that might have 
           expressed itself in the 1930s as a failure to recognize an actual evil 
           in the world and react strongly against it. But if that attitude failed 
           miserably in politics, it was vindicated in physics. For Heisenberg’s 
           intuitions concerning the limits of our abilities to visualize the ulti-
           mate reality underlying space and time have held true to this day.
              The  experiments  proposed  in  the  1950s  and  1960s  have  con-
           clusively  demonstrated  that  particles  do  have  ghostly  qualities, 
           that entangled particles are indeed capable of something like the 
           “spooky  action  at  a  distance”  that  Einstein  thought  he  had  ban-
           ished from physics.54 Surprisingly, however, it turns out that, as the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   95                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           96              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           renowned string theorist Brian Greene has put it, “special relativity 
           survives by the skin of its teeth.” This is because, in point of fact, no 
           information actually travels between two entangled particles when 
           one is observed. What happens, rather, is that one observer now has 
           a knowledge of what some other observer will see if they observe the 
           particle somewhere else. But that same observer has no ability what-
           soever  to  transmit  that  knowledge  faster  than  light  speed.55  That 
           knowledge remains an interpretation from a given perspective; it 
           remains part of a dialogue.
             Recall how Feynman suggested we needed to change our per-
           spective to understand that the paradox of quantum mechanics is 
           really “only a conﬂict between reality and your feeling of what real-
           ity ‘ought to be.’ ” That feeling of how it ought to be is a very strong 
           one. But what if it’s the feeling itself that relies on outlandish impos-
           sibilities? The feeling Feynman referred to is the same one that Ein-
           stein and Schrödinger hoped would be rea<rmed but never was. It’s 
           the feeling that reality is out there independent of our observations 
           and measurements, yes. But more crucially it casts that feeling, that 
           presupposition, with a very speciﬁc image and structure, one shaped 
           by how our observations necessarily come to us: namely, extended 
           in space and successive in time.
             This  assumption  smuggles  into  our  thinking  an  implicit  but 
           totally unacknowledged observer capable of transcending the limits 
           of space and time. This observer takes several forms. For the reality 
           that makes quantum physics seem paradoxical, we implicitly adopt 
           the  perspective  of,  borrowing  from  the  title  of  Arundhati  Roy’s 
           beautiful novel, a god of very small things. Likewise, for the com-
           monplace perspective from which special relativity’s stretching and 
           shrinking of space and time seem unimaginable, we import a god of 
           very large things. In each case, the god embodies a perspective that 
           is impossible for humans to occupy.
             To know, perceive, or imagine anything at all requires us to span 
           points in space and time, to be at some point in space-time  and not 
           at another one, and then make a bridge from one to the other. Like 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   96                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     97

           Funes looking in the mirror and feeling surprised at his own image 
           (impossibly,  because  he  supposedly  can’t  generalize  over  speciﬁc 
           impressions),  it  requires  holding  together  both  a  sense  of  what’s 
           di7erent and a sense of what’s the same between two moments. It 
           requires, as Kant reminded Hume, a synthesis of at least two discern-
           ible events. For a human or any other ﬁnite being, such a synthesis 
           requires traversing some minimal amount of space-time.  The god of 
           very large things, in contrast, can be simultaneously at two points in 
           space- time (indeed, is at every point in space- time) and hence can 
           experience what we ﬁnite beings can only ever measure and infer: 
           that observing a particle at one point indeed means its entangled 
           particle will exhibit a speciﬁc value at another point. This god can 
           do this because, unlike us beings in space and time, for this god the 
           speed limit of light is not a factor to contend with. Simultaneity, 
           which for us is always a projection of one observer’s imagination on 
           another place, is real only for such a god.
              Likewise, for that god’s partner in crime, the god of very small 
           things, quantum changes can take place while being observed. For 
           this  god, there  is  no  space  too  small, no  time  too  short, for  it  to 
           straddle  both  sides  of  a  change  and  witness  that  transformation. 
           For us, in contrast, bound by time and space, we can infer a change 
           has occurred based on what we observe, but if prodded by Zeno or 
           quantum data to delve down too far into the crevices of space- time, 
           we get to a point where such change is incompatible with our obser-
           vation. Indeed, a watched quantum pot, it is said, never boils.
              This is exactly what another astonishing set of experiments in 
           the 1990s showed.56 In these experiments, carried out by scientists at 
           the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology, beryllium 
           ions were blasted with radio waves for a temporal interval that guar-
           antees a 100 percent chance of an ion jumping up in energy levels. 
           For any given ion and energy level, the temporal interval between 
           when there is a 0 percent probability of an ion changing levels and 
           a 100 percent probability of it changing levels can be subdivided, 
           creating a time frame when there is a 50 percent chance of an ion 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   97                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           98              THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           having made the jump. True to quantum form, if a batch of beryl-
           lium ions is heated in this fashion, and measured at the half point, 
           half of the ions will be at the higher energy level, and half at the 
           lower. But if we now start dividing that time frame into shorter and 
           shorter segments, looking ten times, say, over a certain period and 
           then twenty times over the same period, peeking at the ions at each 
           of these intervals to see whether they have changed or not, fewer and 
           fewer end up making the jump. The experiment is limited only by 
           how brief scientists can make the intervals between their observa-
           tions, but the result is clear: “If it were possible to monitor the ions 
           all the time then none of them would ever change.”57
             As  crazy  as  these  results  sound,  we  should  resist  the  impulse 
           to  shrug  our  shoulders  and  chalk  one  up  for  the  paradoxical 
           nature of the quantum world. What Feynman said in his lectures 
           echoes  what  Borges  showed  in  his  own  analysis  of  Zeno.  Borges 
           showed  that  Zeno’s  paradox  arises  from  our  having  assumed  the 
           solidity  and  continuity  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  reality  Achil-
           les and the tortoise inhabit. Likewise, the very nature of what an 
           observation  requires—the  bridging  of  two  discernible  points  in 
           space- time— mandates the results of these experiments. Yes, in every-
           day life Achilles catches up with the tortoise, and yes, in everyday life 
           Diogenes the Cynic can banish Zeno by getting up and walking. But 
           our everyday life is not a life of Planck scales and light speed. At the 
           quantum level a beryllium ion can no more change its energy state 
           while being observed than Funes can truly both be surprised at his 
           reﬂection and see that reﬂection anew, as if for the very ﬁrst time. 
           For the ion to change while being observed, or for Funes to truly 
           be surprised, would require space- time to be something real, some-
           thing independent, the stu7 in which change happens. But it’s not. 
           It’s nothing more than a tool we use to relate our observations into a 
           coherent whole. And the essential, indispensable humility that pow-
           ers the scientiﬁc method depends on our resisting the temptation to 
           think of it as real.
             In the next chapter we return to Kant as he rose in the ranks of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   98                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                 Entanglements                     99

           academia and began to glimpse the relation between our scientiﬁc 
           knowledge and how we experience both beauty and the obligations 
           entailed by our freedom. We will also see how his realization of the 
           source of our errors had implications for his state’s religious cen-
           sors, and how he came upon a critical method to protect against the 
           persistent error we make in assuming we can attain the knowledge 
           of a god.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   99                                 2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                      5

                              SUB SPECIE          
                            AETERNITATIS


                 ''- !-'3&**'- )"#$. %& might have hoped that assuming 
                 the title of Full Professor of Logic and Metaphysics would 
          Plessen his workload. If so, he was soon disabused. While he 
           would no longer depend on student fees to pay for his room and 
           board, he continued to teach a backbreaking schedule— on top of 
           which he now came to know the singular joys of administration.
             As of the summer of 1770, a typical day for the overtaxed pro-
           fessor Kant began at 5:00 a.m., when his servant, a retired soldier 
           named Martin Lampe, would roust him from bed. In this, Lampe 
           performed one of his essential, and most di<cult, tasks. For Kant’s 
           awesome dedication to his duty was matched only by his inclina-
           tion to keep sleeping, especially on those dark and chilly mornings 
           that reminded him of his days of childhood treks to the Collegium. 
           Still, with Lampe’s persistence Kant always managed to haul himself 
           from bed. Then he would drink two cups of weak tea and smoke 
           one pipeful of tobacco, devoting the time this took “to meditation.” 
           Though  he  proudly  insisted  on  never  smoking  a  second  pipe, he 
           ruefully  confessed  that  the  pipe’s  size  grew  substantially  over  the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   100                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             101

           years.1
              Now fully awake, Kant would devote the next hour and a half 
           to  thinking  and  writing,  as  well  as  preparing  his  lectures  for  the 
           day. In the summer semester of 1770, on most days of the week he 
           would lecture on logic at 7:00 a.m. He would then teach another 
           unit of logic from 8:00 to 9:00, followed by ethics and practical phi-
           losophy from 9:00 to 10:00 and a course on the encyclopedia right 
           a.er that. The demand for his teaching even extended beyond his 
           expertise in logic and metaphysics. Two days of the week he taught 
           classes on geography, and in the winter semester he agreed to teach 
           (of all things) minerology. In all he racked up twenty- two hours of 
           classes in a given week, not counting the regular public lectures a 
           professor was expected to give—a  truly astounding time expendi-
           ture for someone bent on bringing out a book that would change 
           the world.2
              To  make  matters  worse,  professors  were  expected  to  alternate 
           taking on the position of dean. In addition to being the chief aca-
           demic  administrator  of  his  faculty,  Kant  as  dean  had  to  serve  on 
           the academic senate that oversaw the governance of the university, 
           deciding  on  disputes, complaints, and  all  sundry  issues  that  sully 
           the life of the mind. He was also supposed to administer exams to 
           some eighty incoming students each year. This last task, apparently, 
           was one bridge too far. He didn’t even try to take it seriously, declar-
           ing himself satisﬁed if a student didn’t exhibit “extreme neglect.”3 
           In typical Kantian fashion, though, he justiﬁed this lassitude with a 
           maxim, declaring that “trees grow better when they stand and grow 
           outside, and they bring more fruit this way than if they were grown 
           by artiﬁce.”4
              By the mid-1770s,  Kant’s writing on all manner of subjects, his 
           inaugural dissertation and the debate it sparked among the most 
           inﬂuential German thinkers, and his great popularity as a lecturer 
           had  made  him  famous  in  German  academic  circles.  In  1778  the 
           Prussian minister of education asked him if he would consider mov-
           ing to Halle, one of the most prestigious universities in the realm, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   101                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           102             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           for a salary more than double what he earned in Königsberg. When 
           Kant demurred, the minister raised the o7er by another third and 
           sweetened it with the honoriﬁc of royal courtier. But Kant did not 
           want to move.5 He had, as he wrote in a letter to one friend, “all that 
           I wished for, namely a peaceful situation that is exactly ﬁtted to my 
           needs: in turn occupied with work, speculation, and society, where 
           my easily a7ected, but otherwise carefree, mind and my even more 
           capricious body . . . will be occupied without strain.”6
             In this ambience of comfort and stability, what Kant called soci-
           ety played a signiﬁcant role. He frequented noble households for 
           dinner,  where  he  would  usually  occupy  the  place  of  honor  next 
           to the lady of the house. He had his good friends, such as the En-
           glishman Joseph Green, with whom he kept regular company. But 
           he also enjoyed mingling with people from di7erent social classes. 
           Ever a bachelor, Kant didn’t keep a household in the conventional 
           sense and always took his meals in restaurants and pubs, where he 
           would happily engage in conversations with anyone who cared to 
           join him. His only aversions were to pretension and to those who 
           might make him work during his leisure time, plying the professor 
           with questions about his writings or lectures. Indeed, he ceased to 
           frequent one tavern when he was approached there once too o.en 
           by men who joined his table “without being invited, expecting that 
           he would lecture them at lunch and answer their objections.”7
             If  the  company  was  important  to  him,  the  food  had  its  place 
           as well. Kant would make deals with restaurant owners to secure 
           the  best  meat  and,  importantly,  wine.  When  he  found  a  dish  he 
           particularly liked, he would compliment the chef and ask for the 
           recipe— more  out  of  curiosity  than  intent,  since  he  would  never 
           cook himself. He would also be honest about any shortcomings he 
           perceived. As one commentator wryly remarked, perhaps the delay 
           of Professor Kant’s long- awaited expansion of his inaugural disserta-
           tion owed to his clandestine work on a di7erent book altogether, 
           The Critique of the Art of Cooking.8
             Indeed, Kant’s great contribution to philosophy was taking lon-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   102                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             103

           ger to appear than he had expected. When he sent a colleague a copy 
           of  his  dissertation  in  1770,  he  added  a  note  promising  he  would 
           soon ﬁnish outlining “a position from which all sorts of metaphysi-
           cal questions can be examined according to wholly certain and easy 
           criteria,” an endeavor he thought possible in “a rather small space” 
           and needing only a “few letters.”9 Thus began a decade- long procras-
           tination punctuated by intermittent declarations of an imminent 
           publication,  followed  by  longer  periods  of  silence.  Even  his  fam-
           ily grew restless. In July 1773 his brother Johann Heinrich wrote 
           to him complaining of their long separation and wondering if he 
           couldn’t get a peek at Kant’s ideas before they appeared on every 
           bookstore shelf in Germany.10 Toward the end of the same year he 
           let it be known to correspondents that they could expect a ﬁnished 
           version by the following Easter. When the book again failed to mate-
           rialize, the German- speaking intellectual world began to grumble. 
           As Johann Kaspar Lavater, a popular writer and author of a world- 
           renowned guide to the science of physiognomy, wrote to the truant 
           professor, “Say something to me even in a couple of lines. Are you 
           dead? Why do so many write who cannot—and  you, who write so 
           exquisitely, write nothing? Why are you silent? Are you asleep?”11
              Kant was not sleeping. In truth he was working overtime. But the 
           problem he was working on had become much bigger. In his disser-
           tation Kant had divided the intellectual and the sensible worlds into 
           separate realms. The former consisted of unconditional truths; the 
           latter consisted of judgments that were always contingent on some 
           other state of a7airs. As he worked on that problem, he realized that 
           mixing the two realms— treating, that is, intellectual ideas as if they 
           had extension in space and duration in time or taking mere sensory 
           impressions for inexhaustible and incontrovertible truths—would  
           inexorably  lead  thinkers  to  untenable  contradictions.  As  he  later 
           reﬂected, “At ﬁrst I saw this theory only in shadow. I tried very seri-
           ously to prove propositions and their opposites, not in order to jus-
           tify a dubious theory but because I suspected I might discover an 
           illusion of the understanding.”12


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   103                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           104             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             By  1769,  as  he  was  engrossed  in  ﬁnishing  his  dissertation,  the 
           nature of that illusion had become clear to him. When we ask the 
           most fundamental questions— what is the soul, what is the world 
           in its totality, what is God?— our answers may be equally convinc-
           ing even while utterly opposed to one another.13 The only way this 
           could  be  the  case,  Kant  realized,  was  if  we  were  mistaken  about 
           which world we were trying to describe; if, in other words, we failed 
           to  distinguish  whether  we  were  speaking  about  the  world  of  the 
           senses or the world of ideas.
             If we consider space and time as an idea, any distance or moment 
           can be further divided: Achilles will never catch up with the tor-
           toise; I will enjoy my cookie for eternity. Taken as a sensual experi-
           ence, in contrast, Achilles runs past his opponent in seconds, and 
           I’m le. wistfully eyeing my empty plate. Likewise, Kant reasoned, I 
           can think of the entire universe as existing necessarily, programmed 
           from the beginning of time to the end, or I can take the opposite 
           tack and imagine that all I ever encounter are contingent, arbitrary 
           impressions, none of which have any necessity.
             These paradoxes, foreseen two thousand years earlier by Zeno, 
           showed Kant the way. Achilles and his exasperating tortoise weren’t 
           a riddle to be solved. They were a sign that the history of philosophy 
           had overlooked something essential about the very nature of real-
           ity itself. Achilles failed to catch the tortoise only because reason 
           jumbled together two incompatible modes of thought and treated 
           the here and there and the now and then of spatiotemporal existence 
           as if they were relevant to eternal, immutable beings, and likewise 
           treated the ineluctable mathematical fact of inﬁnite divisibility as if 
           it had purchase on a world in which warriors run, tortoises crawl, 
           and cynical philosophers can just get up and walk.
             Because  he  had  grasped  this  truth  with  such  clarity, it  was  no 
           wonder that Kant thought he was months away from spitting out 
           one  whole  coherent  system.  And  what  a  system  it  would  be.  For 
           Kant didn’t just have in his sights a work that would delineate the 
           respective  worlds  of  sensibility  and  reason,  and  thus  clarify  what 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   104                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             105

           science can hope to know objectively. Kant now grasped that even 
           this great advance was but the tip of an iceberg. For if such a system 
           could be found, it would more than merely clarify the grounds of 
           objective knowledge in the physical sciences. Astoundingly, it would 
           also unlock a new science of art and morality, realms long thought 
           to be either intractably subjective or beholden to God, authority, or 
           tradition.
              The problem was, something was still missing.


           1# " 2&$$&- $' the Swiss philosopher and polymath Johann Hein-
           rich Lambert in September 1770, Kant hinted that his forthcoming 
           book would include more than a treatise on the possibility of objec-
           tive knowledge in science. Indeed, he already envisioned a practical 
           part, a “metaphysics of morals” that he would ﬁnish that winter. In 
           June 1771 he wrote to Markus Herz, a Jewish student from Berlin 
           who had become a close friend and correspondent, that the book 
           was under way and would include a “sketch of the nature of aesthet-
           ics, metaphysics and morals.”14 A few years later, still teasing out the 
           entire structure, he confessed to Herz his interest in completing the 
           portion on morals ﬁrst.15
              Why did Kant feel compelled to bring morality at all into his 
           quest to understand how humans come to know the world, much 
           less grant it such a prominent place in his endeavor? In questions 
           concerning morality, like those concerning knowledge, Kant leaned 
           heavily on British thinkers like David Hume, who had attributed 
           our willingness to do good for others to a kind of moral sensibility, 
           a feeling of pleasure that arises when we act in a way beneﬁting oth-
           ers, even if that action might lead to our own disadvantage.
              True to  his  skeptical  tendencies,  in  his Enquiry  Concerning  the 
           Principles of Morals, Hume had tried to dispense with transcendental 
           sources for knowing the right thing to do in any given situation. 
           Instead,  he  proposed  a  theory  of  morals  that  relied  on “no  argu-
           ments but those which are derived from experience.”16 Hume said 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   105                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           106             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           his experience had taught him that selﬂess action is an irreducible 
           aspect of human behavior, universally admired and esteemed, and 
           that “a tendency to public good, and to the promoting of peace, har-
           mony, and order in society, does always, by a7ecting the benevolent 
           principles of our frame, engage us on the side of the social virtues.”17 
           As  with  his  forays  into  the  question  of  what  we  can  know,  Kant 
           attended to Hume’s reasoning because it provided a kind of correc-
           tive to the rationalist approach that associated the moral law with 
           God’s will and naturally presumed to know what that must be.
             Nevertheless,  by  1770,  Kant  decided  that  the  British  approach 
           su7ered from a serious ﬂaw. As he formulated the problem around 
           that time, “The doctrine of moral feeling is more a hypothesis to 
           explain the phenomenon of approval that we give to some kinds of 
           action than one which could determine maxims and ﬁrst principles 
           that hold objectively and tell us how we should approve or reject 
           something.”18 Kant was convinced that feelings of approval or disap-
           proval of our or others’ actions must depend on something else, “a 
           necessary internal law that makes us view and feel ourselves from 
           an external point of view.”19 Our mere feelings, be they of sympathy 
           or  anger,  pleasure  or  pain,  could  never  be  the  basis  for  knowing 
           the right thing to do, because they were always contingent, always 
           subject to the vicissitudes of a shi.ing world tossed around in space 
           and time. For Kant, the changeability of the spatiotemporal world 
           undermined the very idea of something being right or true, which 
           required, nay, sprang from, permanence in the face of change. The 
           right thing to do, whatever it was, had to be unconditional. Herz 
           wrote back to Kant that the idea made him tremble: should Kant 
           discover such a moral law as it applied to all men, it alone would 
           become the study worthy of a scholar.20
             By the ﬁrst years of the 1770s, Kant realized that a solution to one 
           problem— how we know that our science yields objectively true laws 
           and  not  merely  a  concatenation  of  arbitrary  impressions— could 
           lead him to the solution to other key problems: how to determine 
           what is right and just in a world of variable norms; or how to know 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   106                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             107

           what is truly beautiful in a world of changing tastes and fashions. At 
           the same time, seeing that these were all parts of one and the same 
           question focused Kant’s mind on a common di<culty underlying 
           all of them. In a now famous letter from February 1772, Kant con-
           fessed to Herz that he “still lacked something essential, something 
           that in my long metaphysical studies I, as well as others, had failed 
           to pay attention to and that, in fact, constitutes the key to the whole 
           secret.”21
              In his dissertation Kant had already determined that a crucial 
           class  of  human  knowledge  must  be  independent  of  the  sensual 
           world.  For  instance,  the  deﬁnition  of  a  triangle  and  the  rules  we 
           derive about the relations among its three sides and angles are true 
           and will remain true regardless of whether we ever encounter a tri-
           angle in our lives, and no triangular entity we do encounter will ever 
           correspond perfectly to its ideal counterpart. The knowledge that 
           we derive from a discipline like mathematics is a priori true; that is, 
           it is true on its own merits and never derives a posteriori from our 
           experiences  in  the  world.  Such  intellectual  representations “must 
           have their origin in the nature of the soul [since] they are neither 
           caused by the object nor bring the object into being.” However, as 
           Kant went on in his letter to Herz, “I silently passed over the further 
           question of how a representation that refers to an object without 
           being in any way a7ected by it can be possible. . . . [I]f such intellec-
           tual representations depend on our inner activity, whence comes the 
           agreement that they are supposed to have with objects?”22
              Kant  had  run  headlong  into  a  problem  of  his  own  making. 
           He had tried to mend the di7erences between philosophers who 
           believed that all we could know came from our senses, and would 
           thus  always  remain  contingent  and  uncertain,  and  those  who 
           believed that an ultimate code determined the world and the way 
           we  perceived  it,  eternal  and  unconditioned  by  anything  else.  His 
           solution, to say that both worlds existed and that each side of this 
           philosophical debate neglected one or the other, now posed a major 
           problem for him. How could the two worlds ever communicate?


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   107                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           108             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             Kant  now  realized  that  the  entire  history  of  philosophy  had 
           been struggling with this very problem and that, in every case, phi-
           losophers  had  missed  the  point.  On  one  side  radical  empiricists 
           like Hume had given up hope that humans could ﬁnd a depend-
           able basis for deriving the laws of nature, or they had assumed that 
           any tendency to do good was simply a fact of the world, due to the 
           “benevolent principles of our frames,” and that rigid notions of the 
           law and justice were a superﬂuous overlay to instinctual behaviors.23 
           On the other side, philosophers from Plato all to the way to Leib-
           niz, who did believe humans could successfully come to know the 
           world as it is and derive laws for the Good or the Beautiful, implic-
           itly attributed the cause for this knowledge to God: if we can know 
           the deepest nature of reality, that’s because some deity has planted 
           a knowledge of unchanging things in our souls from the beginning 
           or has guided the ﬂow of our existence by way of a “preestablished 
           harmony.” But such a deus ex machina was intolerable to Kant, for 
           whom it not only represented “the greatest absurdity one could hit 
           upon in the determination of the origin and validity of our knowl-
           edge,” but also had the additional disadvantage of encouraging “all 
           sorts of wild notions and every pious and speculative brainstorm.”24 
           Indeed, Kant now knew that one of the pressing needs of his phi-
           losophy would be to cleanse humans of their destructive tendency 
           to theorize about God and the spirit world, or use religion to say 
           something meaningful about the world of the senses.25
             By the time he sent his letter to Herz, Kant already knew how the 
           components of his system needed to come together. “Without going 
           into details here,” he wrote, “now I am in a position to bring out a 
           ‘Critique of Pure Reason’ that will deal with the nature of theoretical 
           as well as practical knowledge”—which  he then, with characteristic 
           sunniness, promised to deliver in the next three months.26 What did 
           Kant see? And why did it take so much longer than three months to 
           get it into print? As he would later put it, this was his Copernican 
           Revolution. Like Copernicus removing the earth from the center of 
           creation, Kant had decided to do away with a fundamental presup-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   108                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             109

           position  common  to  all  attempts  to  describe  how  humans  come 
           to know the world: namely, that what we are trying to understand 
           is the world itself. What we are really trying to understand, he now 
           saw, is our picture of the world. And our natural tendency to think we 
           are speaking about the world is what must be subjected to critique. 
           Thus would be born a new “age of critique” that would initiate the 
           downfall of humanity’s submission to the age- old idols of its own 
           creation. This would be called Enlightenment.27
              The  essence  of  his  revolution  was  Kant’s  realization  that  the 
           very coherence of the picture we make of the world depended on 
           conditions that must hold true for a being who exists in time and 
           space— that is, for a being for whom things are located in relation 
           to one another and events succeed one another— to come to know 
           anything  at  all.  For  sensory  input  to  become  knowledge  of  the 
           world requires that objects be located in respect to other things, and 
           that events be sequenced as coming before, a.er, or simultaneous 
           to other events. But locating objects in respect to one another in 
           space, or sequencing events in time, is something that pure sense 
           perception on its own cannot accomplish. Beings who experience 
           the world through sensory exposure need to unify and organize that 
           exposure. In the case of our experience of the spatial relations of 
           objects, for instance, we do this by implicitly presupposing that they 
           exist simultaneously in a shared space. However, just like Hume div-
           ing  into  his  impressions  and  not  ﬁnding  himself  there, when  we 
           explore the space around us, we encounter things extended across 
           it but not the space itself. Indeed, try to imagine erasing the stu7 
           around you, item by item. First the people and furniture go. Then 
           the architecture. Then the natural world around you. The light, the 
           air, everything goes. What’s le. is space itself, and yet what’s le., if 
           we are truly deleting everything, is simply emptiness. There’s no there 
           there. As Kant wrote in the Critique, “The simultaneity of substances 
           in space cannot be cognized in experience otherwise than under the 
           presupposition of an interaction among them; this is therefore also 
           the condition of possibility of the things themselves as objects of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   109                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           110             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           experience.”28 Like the self, space is not an object of experience but 
           the very condition for experiencing objects.
             The problems arise, Kant realized, when we then treat those con-
           ditions, those implicit necessary presumptions, as though they were 
           actual stu7 in the world. Consciousness, for instance, isn’t for Kant 
           some mysterious entity that needs to be explained; rather, it is noth-
           ing other than the necessary presumed unity that allows there to be 
           a timeline against which I order and distinguish my perceptions. 
           Likewise, the whole of space, the cosmos, is nothing other than a 
           necessary projection that allows me to distinguish and order objects 
           in relation to one another. As Borges would quip a century and a 
           half later, we must suspect “that there is no universe in the organic, 
           unifying sense of that ambitious word.”29
             The mental faculty responsible for these necessary projections of 
           unity is, for Kant, the Reason in the title of his famous Critique. The 
           ultimate purpose of the book, why he calls it a critique of reason, is 
           that while reason’s drive for unity is necessary for any experience of 
           the world in space and time, that same faculty doesn’t know its own 
           strength. Reason’s amazing ability to unify the disparate exposures 
           of inherently limited beings into a coherent narrative tends to run 
           roughshod over those same limitations. In the case of the self that 
           can blur the di7erences in moments of space-time  enough to allow 
           objects  to  appear  to  us  at  all,  reason  turns  a  necessary  condition 
           of  possibility  of  experience  into  an  independent  substance,  even 
           endowing it with superpowers like the immortality of the soul.30 In 
           the case of the presumption of a shared space that uniﬁes the mani-
           fold of our perceptions into objects, reason turns it into a “collective 
           unity of a whole of experience.”31
             Such a collective unity, “an individual thing containing in itself 
           all  empirical  reality,”32  this  all- encompassing whole— “Deus  sive 
           natura,” Spinoza would call it, God or nature— only such a being 
           could be truly unconditional, self- contained, and not contingent on 
           anything else. A being containing everything, all at once, determin-
           ing each of its part from beginning to end. In his inﬂuential treatise 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   110                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             111

           The Problems of Philosophy, the English philosopher and mathema-
           tician  Bertrand  Russell  declared  that  the  goal  of  philosophy  was 
           to free itself from the biases of individual perspectives and to see 
           the world as “as God might see, without a here and now, without 
           hopes and fears, . . . in the sole and exclusive desire of knowledge . . . 
           as  impersonal,  as  purely  contemplative,  as  it  is  possible  for  man 
           to attain.”33 But in practical terms, what would such a knowledge 
           look like? The ideal of “seeing” the universe sub specie aeternitatis has 
           existed for millennia, but those who have grappled deeply with this 
           ideal have all tended to founder on the same shoal. As beings who 
           must know the world in time and space, the notion of a knowledge 
           unconstrained by time and space is quite simply inconceivable.
              Take one metaphor for knowledge, that of sight. Sight grants us 
           an image of the world, yes, but an exceedingly partial one. Not only 
           do we see very few images in any given moment, but even when we 
           envision an object, we can only ever do so one aspect at a time. Now 
           try to generalize or expand on that ability. Even to stretch the visual-
           ization of a single object beyond a single facet quickly runs aground. 
           What is a cube when simultaneously viewed from all six sides? We 
           quickly see that freeing the constraints of our perspective in such a 
           way doesn’t sharpen our understanding of the cube; instead, it oblit-
           erates it. Indeed, the very “cubeness” or “cubity” of the cube depends 
           on our not being able to see more than three sides at a time. When 
           we start to push the boundaries of this thought ever wider, this limi-
           tation becomes all the more apparent. Not only all visual discern-
           ment but every possible form of knowledge we can obtain about 
           the world depends, radically and entirely, on its limitations in time 
           and space. Seeing everything simultaneously or knowing all time in 
           the blink of an eye would obliterate the very connection between 
           objects and instances that constitutes knowing. Thus, although god-
           like knowledge in its ostensible freedom from bias may seem like 
           a desirable goal, its realization even in theory leads to an absolute 
           contradiction in terms.
              While  individual  cognition  always  presupposes  an  uncondi-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   111                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           112             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           tioned whole, this whole is itself never an object of perception or 
           cognition, nor can it ever be. What I can know is always conditioned 
           on an unconditioned whole that I must presume to exist but that 
           remains  unknowable.  Put  another  way,  the  minimum  condition 
           of any experience whatsoever is not being a god, whether a god of 
           very small things or of very large ones. And, as it happens, this pat-
           tern of projecting the existence of the cosmos as an unconditioned 
           whole, and then receding to the limited sphere of human action, 
           was the trick Kant fell upon to link the question of knowledge with 
           the question of morality, and that opened the door onto his critical 
           system.
             By turning his gaze to the question of what is necessary for an 
           object to appear in the ﬁrst place, or what is necessary for a moral 
           question to emerge in the ﬁrst place, Kant realized that there were 
           basic principles that would apply in all cases—at  least for any being 
           like  us, whose  basic  form  of  existence  was  to  be  located  in  space 
           and time and limited in what it can see and know. For while what 
           we say about the world may never be universal, necessary, and true, 
           we nonetheless can derive universal, necessary, and true statements 
           from the very faculties that allow us to experience the world. For 
           this to happen we must presume a uniﬁed subject, even though we 
           cannot grasp it as an object, operating in a uniﬁed space- time whole, 
           even if we cannot grasp that as an object either. We presuppose those 
           uniﬁed substances as if they were objects of cognition for an eter-
           nal being, but then accept that they are not ours to know, that we 
           are fundamentally limited to representations of that whole in space 
           and time. And it is those representations we study when we do sci-
           ence, not the fundamental nature of the world itself. To put it in 
           the words Heisenberg would use so many years later, in physics “we 
           have to remember that what we observe is not nature in itself but 
           nature exposed to our method of questioning.”34
             Likewise, while we can’t derive universal, necessary, and true laws 
           governing our duty by observing a bunch of customs and presum-
           ing they approximate the moral law, we can derive unconditional 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   112                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             113

           duties from what would be the condition of possibility of our ask-
           ing in the ﬁrst place what the right thing to do is. For this to hap-
           pen, we must generalize from our inclinations, then survey di7erent 
           practices and compare them with those inclinations, and ﬁnally ask 
           ourselves whether there is something we ought to be doing di7er-
           ently. We thus presume an independent, unconditional standard for 
           our actions, the way a perfect being would behave and a way we 
           should behave that would be other than simply doing what we feel 
           like doing. And yet an actually omniscient and omnipotent being 
           for whom all time and space were immediately present would su7er 
           no ignorance, no blindness, and for that reason have no possibility 
           of making any decision, ethical, unethical, or otherwise. The free-
           dom  to  choose,  and  choose  poorly,  is  thus  intrinsic  to  not  being 
           God.
              When  Kant  realized  that  our  knowledge  must  presume  an 
           unconditioned whole and then pull back from it and see itself as 
           conditioned or limited by that whole, when he saw that in a sim-
           ilar  way  our  morality  must  presume  an  unconditioned  duty  as  a 
           standard against which to judge its own conditional behaviors, he 
           accomplished two things. On the one hand, he realized that accept-
           ing those intrinsic limitations would enable science to know more 
           exactly  what  it  measures  and  would  enable  morals  to  determine 
           more exactly how we should behave. On the other, he showed how 
           our natural tendency to extend our epistemological and moral cer-
           tainty beyond those limitations will produce untenable paradoxes, 
           unless we account for and limit that tendency.
              In a word, Kant came to terms with not being God.


           1# $%& 2"*$ ,&"-* of the 1770s, Kant had settled into a comfortable 
           rhythm. A.er a good meal with one of his friends, he would take 
           a long walk down to the river, maintaining that nothing freed the 
           mind for important thoughts like a good walk in the fresh air. One 
           of his early biographers would claim that this pathway, which would 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   113                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           114             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           later be dubbed “the philosophical footpath,” was as responsible as 
           anything else for giving birth to The Critique of Pure Reason.35 But 
           pleasant strolls on their own might not have been enough to get 
           Kant across the ﬁnish line if it hadn’t been for a novel. The novel 
           was a satire of professorial lassitude written by Theodor Gottlieb 
           von Hippel. The main character, lampooned as “Professor Grand-
           father,” has settled into the comforts of his position and ceased work 
           entirely, becoming like “stagnant water.” Kant laughed with other 
           readers at ﬁrst— until he realized, with the publication of the book’s 
           second volume the following year, that he was the butt of the joke. 
           A decade of silence from Germany’s most famous thinker had taken 
           its toll.36
             Message  loud  and  clear.  Kant  stopped  dawdling  and  started 
           writing. The months leading up to publication were a whirlwind 
           of  productivity.  But  when  the Critique  ﬁnally  hit  the  bookstores, 
           the  initial  response  was  perplexity.  Here  was  the  book  his  public 
           had been awaiting for years, and now that it arrived, hardly anyone 
           could understand it. As the grenade- lobbing Hippel would put it in 
           a letter to another reader, “Have you read Kant’s Critique? There’s a 
           darkness in it that is trying to picture itself. Too highfalutin for me. 
           What can help me rid myself of it?” For his part, Hamann would 
           write to Herder in October 1781, “I’m in my third reading of Kant’s 
           book and am stuck. I think I’m going to need a fourth.”37 Still, the 
           multiple reads would eventually pay o7. People soon began to grasp 
           what Kant had accomplished. The age of critique Kant had foreseen 
           was born.
             If Kant went through a period of silence in the decade leading 
           up to the publication of The Critique of Pure Reason, in the years that 
           followed he didn’t seem to shut up. Indeed, Kant’s production for 
           the  ensuing  decade  was  nothing  short  of  monumental.  Not  only 
           did  he  write  a  major  popular  introduction  to  moral  philosophy, 
           the Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals— perhaps still his most 
           widely read book—but  he followed that with the full exposition of 
           his moral philosophy, The Critique of Practical Reason; an important 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   114                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             115

           second edition of The Critique of Pure Reason; a book on the founda-
           tions of the natural sciences; and ﬁnally, at the end of the decade, 
           his extraordinary third Critique, focusing on questions of aesthetic 
           judgment, all punctuated by several widely read essays that set the 
           tone  of  national  philosophical  debate  about  politics  and  history. 
           Amid  this  ﬂurry  of  activity  Kant, who  was  by  now  getting  on  in 
           years, also lectured extensively and, of course, continued to answer 
           the call of his institutional duties, serving as dean several times dur-
           ing this period.
              He also bought a house. While no longer subject to the uncer-
           tainties of renting his quarters, as he had his entire professional life 
           to that point, Kant now began to learn the headaches of being a 
           homeowner. As he prepared to move in, he hired a general contrac-
           tor, to whom he initially expressed his gratitude, writing to him that 
           in taking over the supervision of his building, “you have thus taken 
           a great worry from me because I am entirely ignorant in such things. 
           I have no doubt that the master cra.smen, whom I have told to fol-
           low your instructions, will follow them without objections.”38
              Unfortunately, the cra.smen in question didn’t quite live up to 
           Kant’s expectation. They proposed renovations that ended up being 
           impossible;  they  purchased  too  many  bricks;  and,  naturally,  they 
           pushed back the agreed- upon completion date, causing Kant con-
           siderable worry as to whether he would have a home to live in by 
           the time he vacated his rental. In short, Kant ﬁnally found an anchor 
           of certainty in a world of change— the unreliability of contractors.
              Kant had also made the unfortunate choice of purchasing prop-
           erty that abutted the city’s prison. If he had reason to criticize false 
           piety before, the theatrically loud prayers of the inmates, with which 
           they  intended  to  publicize  their  good  intentions  in  a  desperate 
           appeal  for  clemency,  were  driving  him  batty.  Within  days  of  hav-
           ing moved into his new house, Kant wrote a letter of complaint in 
           which he not- too- subtly suggested that the prisoners might have less 
           reason “to complain about the presumed danger to the salvation of 
           their souls” if they were to sing with the windows closed, and per-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   115                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           116             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           haps even “without screaming with all their might.”39
             While his perception of false piety served as the trigger for this 
           complaint,  it  also  lay  in  the  background  of  Kant’s  thinking  on 
           morality in general. As he had already shown in his Critique of Pure 
           Reason, while positing something like God, an unconditioned and 
           absolute  creator,  was  a  logical  necessity  for  thinking  through  the 
           conditions  of  possibility  of  knowledge  in  time  and  space,  such  a 
           being could only be presupposed as an idea, a kind of ultimate guar-
           antor of coherence, about whom we can know and say nothing of 
           substance. Claims to know anything more could only ever devolve 
           into fanaticism in one’s own interest or, worse, in the interests of 
           some  authority  intent  on  depriving  a  subject  of  her  freedom.  As 
           might be expected, raising such points threatened to trespass on the 
           domain of those who had reason to think that they, and not Profes-
           sor Kant, were the appropriate arbiters in matter of faith.
             In  early  1792,  Kant  submitted  an  essay  to  a  widely  circulated 
           monthly in Berlin with the title “On Radical Evil in Human Nature.” 
           A.er it appeared in April of that year, Kant immediately submitted 
           another essay, this one called “Of the Struggle of the Good Principle 
           with the Evil Principle for Sovereignty over Man.” But when his Ber-
           lin editor presented this paper to the royal censors this time, they 
           rejected it, explaining that while Kant’s ﬁrst essay was philosophical 
           in nature, the second trod into the realm of theology. In the end 
           Kant got around the censors by including both articles as chapters 
           in a book titled Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone, which was 
           eventually approved for publication by the philosophical faculty of 
           the University of Jena and appeared in print in 1793.
             In this book Kant threw down the gauntlet, declaring that exist-
           ing religions should be understood as historically speciﬁc vehicles 
           for what he called the religion of pure reason. Any given religion, its 
           practices, and local beliefs were like an outer, changeable garment 
           enveloping an inner, universal truth of morality. Kant now proposed 
           to  translate  Christian  doctrine  into  these  universal  moral  truths. 
           Whereas the battle in his two most important books on ethics had 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   116                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              Sub Specie Aeternitatis             117

           been  between  personal  inclinations  and  universal  duty,  he  now 
           shi.ed this to a struggle between two kinds of maxims: good ones, 
           which abide by the moral law and take as their lodestar only univer-
           sal aims; and evil ones, which are corrupted by our inclinations. The 
           problem lay in distinguishing the two kinds of maxims. How can 
           we know for sure that we are following a selﬂess maxim rather than 
           one that hides within it a kernel of personal gratiﬁcation?
              Kant recognized in this problem something he had seen in his 
           work on pure reason: an antinomy.40 Either one’s maxims are pure 
           of personal gratiﬁcation, or they are not. If they are pure, then one is 
           born with only good in one’s heart and cannot be personally cred-
           ited for having chosen a righteous path. If, on the other hand, one’s 
           maxims are corrupt from the start, how would it be possible for a 
           human  to  make  the  choice  to  extirpate  those  evil  maxims, “since 
           extirpation  could  occur  only  through  good  maxims,  and  cannot 
           take  place  when  the  ultimate  subjective  ground  of  all  maxims  is 
           postulated as corrupt.”41 The only way out of this dilemma, he saw, 
           was to posit as an axiom that people must be responsible for what 
           they become, even if one can never point to an actual moment when 
           one can know that one is free from any and all determinations. If we 
           didn’t posit this freedom, Kant went on to clarify, a person “could 
           not be held responsible . . . and could therefore be morally neither 
           good nor evil.”42
              And this act— presupposing our ultimate freedom and respon-
           sibility  as  if  we  were  a  free  and  unconditioned  agent,  despite 
           being  immersed  in  a  world  of  contingencies  that  we  cannot 
           control— translates into the language of moral philosophy the core 
           idea of Christianity, namely, the incarnation of God’s eternal perfec-
           tion in the temporal world. Like a ﬁnite human embodying the inﬁ-
           nite ideal of God, the person who presupposes freedom in this way is 
           only then willing to sacriﬁce selﬁsh inclinations through hard work, 
           discipline, remorse, all in the service of a universal ideal. Indeed, in 
           his  own  land’s  reigning  religious  doctrine  Kant  had  found  a  his-
           torical example of the very method he had derived for determin-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   117                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           118             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           ing what we can know for certain about scientiﬁc or moral laws. 
           One presupposes a self- contained cosmos that one can never fully 
           know, one presupposes a perfect moral law that one can never fully 
           embody, precisely to derive the standards of what one can know and 
           ought to do.
             Kant’s translation of Christianity into his own system of moral 
           philosophy  earned  him  the  opprobrium  of  the  censors  in  Berlin. 
           But it also revealed something profound about the origins of some 
           of his deepest philosophical insights. Kant had inherited his belief 
           in the moral law through Martin Luther, who in turn had learned it 
           from Saint Augustine. Luther believed God’s commands were given 
           to humans despite their inability to infallibly follow them, just as 
           parents urge their children to walk before it is physically possible 
           for  them  to  do  so.43  Augustine,  for  his  part,  had  understood  this 
           conﬂict to be essentially between humanity’s temporal nature and 
           God’s eternal truth.44
             This idea, so powerfully expounded by Augustine in his narrative 
           of conversion to Christianity, had its roots in a tradition of thought 
           that circulated around the Mediterranean basin in the ﬁrst centuries 
           CE, when the cult of Christianity was emerging in ﬁts and starts. Its 
           proponents were many and varied, but one stands out. He was an 
           Egyptian by the name of Plotinus, and in his book The Enneads he 
           expounds the doctrine of time as the moving image of eternity that 
           was so inﬂuential to Augustine and that seeped into the groundwa-
           ters of Kant’s intellectual upbringing.
             Curiously,  it  was  this  very  book  that  Borges  was  reading  as 
           he  searched  for  respite  from  his  overwhelming  despair  and  that 
           inspired him to create the ﬁction that would turn him into one of 
           the  most  inﬂuential  writers  of  the  twentieth  century.  In  the  next 
           chapter we will see how Borges used these ideas to recover from his 
           depression even as he explored the antinomy of a total and uncon-
           ditioned knowledge.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   118                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                       6

                             IN THE BLINK            
                                OF AN EYE


               # $%& ,&"- FC@ the Roman emperor Constantine called for an 
               assembly of Christian bishops to gather in the town of Nicaea, 
           Inow Iznik in modern- day Turkey. While it may seem arcane to 
           many of us today, the theological question at hand was of burning 
           importance to those in attendance. On one side of the room were 
           ranged those who were convinced by the teachings of Arius, a presby-
           ter from Egypt who held that God the Father should be understood 
           as  separate  and  hence  superior  to  Jesus  the  Son, whom  God  had 
           created and who in turn must have had an origin in time. Aligned 
           against the Arians were the adherents of Eustathius, the bishop of 
           Antioch, who countered that Jesus could not be secondary to God 
           but must be understood as an equal and hence also eternal mani-
           festation of God’s substance in human form. Such was the force of 
           Eustathius’s arguments that the assembly of bishops voted almost 
           unanimously to adopt this view and declare Arianism a heresy.1
              Born  some  thirty  years  a.er  the  bishops  met  in  Nicaea,  Saint 
           Augustine  of  Hippo  adopted  and  codiﬁed  the  idea  of  Jesus’s  full 
           and equal participation in God’s divinity despite having been born, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   119                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           120             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           lived,  and  died  as  a  man.2  Indeed  it  was  his  nuanced  interpreta-
           tion that provided Augustine with the defense he needed against 
           Arianism, since it allowed Jesus to be both human and divine, an 
           incarnation in the temporal world of God’s unalterable eternity, the 
           “mediator between you the One and us the many, who live in a mul-
           tiplicity of distractions by many things.”3
             What Saint Augustine was expounding was the mystery of the 
           Incarnation,  the  theological  centerpiece  to  Christianity,  repeated 
           each week since the early centuries of the church by its millions of 
           adherents when they intone in unison that Christ is “true God from 
           true God, begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father.”4 This 
           Nicene Creed emerged from the conference called by Constantine 
           in 325, but Augustine was drawn to it primarily because it solved (or 
           at least encapsulated) for him the fundamental mystery of human 
           existence. How  do  limited, temporal  beings  like  us  participate  in 
           the universal, eternal All that is God? We can do so only partially, 
           he decided, because there is one who does so fully, one who is both 
           man, and hence was born, lived, su7ered, and died, and also divine, 
           and hence embodies without any loss or di7erence the entirety of 
           God’s  universal  being.  Augustine  had  learned  of  this  mystery  by 
           reading Plotinus.
             Plotinus was born in the early years of the third century CE in 
           Egypt, then an outpost of the Roman Empire. As a young man he 
           studied the revitalized Greek philosophy ﬂourishing at the time, but 
           he had heard rumors of a great fount of wisdom in the East. Curious 
           to learn more, he enlisted in the army of the emperor Gordian III 
           and joined his doomed campaign to conquer Persia. A.erward he 
           settled in Rome and quickly ascended the ranks of the capital’s most 
           respected teachers. He followed a strict Pythagorean practice in his 
           dress and eating habits, abjuring all meat, and his teachings took on 
           a mystical, personalized ﬂair.5
             Of  particular  interest  to  Plotinus  was  the  concept  of  eternity, 
           which would prove so inspiring to Augustine. Plotinus didn’t con-
           ceive  of  eternity  as  an  endless,  boring  extension  of  the  present. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   120                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              121

           Instead, he imagined eternity as everything, all existence, all space, 
           and all time, captured at once, in the blink of an eye. Eternity wasn’t 
           the endless expansion of time; it was the absolute negation of time. 
           We humans experience things in time because we are limited and 
           cannot  fully  grasp  the  absolute  unity  of  all  things.  The  time  we 
           inhabit, he taught, is nothing but the moving image of eternity, an 
           insigniﬁcant second hand sweeping over the face of a vast, immobile 
           clock, never grasping more than a fraction of its surface. However, 
           we could be certain that this eternity existed. For, as Kant would also 
           see a millennium and a half later, our very ability to experience any 
           given moment in time logically necessitates the existence of a reality 
           that transcends those moments, a greater unity that “upholds things, 
           that they not fall asunder.”6
              Augustine  turned  Plotinus’s  vision  into  a  personal,  existential 
           quest. He called his life a “distension in several directions” and saw 
           himself  “scattered  in  times  whose  order”  he  didn’t  understand.7 
           Christ’s incarnation of God’s total, all- encompassing being prom-
           ised  him  the  only  path  to  salvation,  a  path  that  leads  from  the 
           “storms of incoherent events” tearing to pieces the entrails of his 
           soul, to “that day when, puriﬁed and molten by the ﬁre of your love, 
           I ﬂow together to merge into you.”8 But for all its personal urgency, 
           Augustine’s  quest  would  become  a  universal  touchstone, his  idea 
           of eternity the ultimate template for the desire that animates our 
           fallen, temporal lives.


           (, &"-2, 4BFG, ('-/&* had sunk into the black bile of despair. His 
           stories and poems from that time reek of death and are pockmarked 
           with razor- sharp references to suicide. In one story, an actor receives 
           a passionate onstage kiss from his beloved, only to be rebu7ed in her 
           dressing room— a.er which he o7s himself. In another, a medical 
           student su7ering from feelings of inadequacy enters a pawnshop to 
           purchase a revolver but deviates from his intent at the last moment, 
           buying instead a phonograph with the money he would have spent 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   121                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           122             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           on ending his life.9
             If the second story vaguely suggests art as a path to redemption, 
           for Borges that path would stretch on for several more excruciat-
           ing years, during which the solace of death never ceased to beckon. 
           Yet thankfully, for posterity and the world of letters, he managed to 
           resist temptation. And what kept him aﬂoat, even if only barely, was 
           a small, nagging problem. The problem of eternity.
             Granted this problem wasn’t new. (How could it be?) Borges had 
           obsessed about inﬁnite time already in the 1920s in essays like the 
           one on Achilles and the tortoise, or the one titled “The Duration of 
           Hell.” In these cases and others, he grappled with the idea of eternity 
           as the endlessness of time, be it internally, as one chops it into ever 
           smaller pieces, or externally, in the hell of quite literally one damned 
           thing a.er another. Each of these visions tormented him with the 
           a.erimage of a lost love, ever receding in the dri. of time. With his 
           new thoughts on eternity, however, Borges added another dimen-
           sion to his approach. He started rereading Plotinus.
             His daily life shrouded in the misery of depression, Borges fell 
           hard for the gravitational pull of Plotinus’s vision of eternity. This 
           was not the bad inﬁnity of one day of su7ering a.er another (a.er 
           another . . .) that plagued his contemplation of the duration of hell; 
           nor was it the obliteration of the self that he saw as somehow worse. 
           Here beckoned a vision of utter plenitude, simultaneously grasped, 
           with no toll paid to the ravages of time. Here was Perfection. Here 
           was Bliss. And yet Borges could still not ﬁnd a satisfactory explana-
           tion for how we participate in the eternal if, as Plotinus had put it, 
           humans are always in time.10 There could be only one answer. Some-
           thing in us escapes the temporal, even as we inhabit that realm.
             It was this something that Borges glimpsed as he paged through 
           his worn copy of Plotinus. To be human, Borges saw, is to straddle 
           the impossible border between ephemerality and eternity, loss and 
           permanence. From the vantage of a si.ing, vanishing time we proj-
           ect an eternity hopelessly out of reach. Like the exile who, “with a 
           melting heart,” recalls “expectations of happiness,” we “gather up all 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   122                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              123

           the delights of a given past in a single image.”11 Eternity is nostalgia, 
           the inextinguishable desire for what we’ve lost.12
              Not everything was doom and gloom, though. In 1932, Borges 
           had met a writer some ﬁ.een years his junior by the name of Adolfo 
           Bioy  Casares.  They  were  introduced  to  each  other  at  a  luncheon 
           hosted by the writer and socialite Victoria Ocampo, to whose great 
           exasperation the two men promptly withdrew from the other guests 
           and fell into deep private conversation about, naturally, books. When 
           she urged them not to be “such shits” and to come back and talk to 
           her guests, they opted to leave instead so they could continue their 
           conversation un- harangued.13
              Unlike  Borges,  who  couldn’t  have  been  more  of  a  city  slicker, 
           Bioy was a scion of the landed gentry. He was studying law in Bue-
           nos Aires when they met but soon ditched his studies— ostensibly 
           to dedicate himself to his family’s lands, but really to free himself 
           for a pursuit much closer to his heart: reading and writing. A few 
           years a.er bailing on Ocampo’s luncheon, Bioy invited Borges to 
           stay with him at his estancia not far from the city. Borges did his best 
           to adapt to the environs, going so far as to claim he knew how to 
           ride— a ﬁction soon debunked by his propensity to slide o7 the far 
           side of every horse he tried to mount.14
              Shortly  a.er  Borges’s  strange  little  book A  History  of  Eternity 
           appeared to bewildered reviews in 1936, Bioy became one of the few 
           people to purchase it. In addition to the essay on Plotinus, another 
           on  Nietzsche’s  concept  of  the  eternal  return,  and  a  discussion  of 
           competing translations of the One Thousand and One Nights, Borges 
           had included a brief review of two versions of an obscure Indian 
           novel. Bioy was so captivated by Borges’s review that he ordered the 
           novel from a bookseller in London, only to learn that it didn’t exist. 
           Bioy  had  become  one  of  the  ﬁrst  to  fall  for  what  would  become 
           a  standard  Borgesian  trick—inserting  ﬁctions  into  the  real  world 
           in the form of obscure footnotes, invented references, or seemingly 
           scholarly studies of concocted writers.
              The little review that so confused Bioy dealt with a novel called 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   123                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           124             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           The  Approach  to  Al- Mu’tasim,  ostensibly  authored  by  a  Bombay- 
           based  attorney  named  Mir  Bahadur  Ali.  The  novel  ﬁrst  appeared 
           in 1932 in an edition so cheap “its paper was virtually newsprint,” 
           with promotional copy touting it as the ﬁrst detective novel written 
           by a Bombay native. Accolades in the local press spurred Bahadur 
           Ali to release an updated, illustrated edition in 1934. This is the one 
           that was then purportedly reprinted in London “with a foreword 
           by Dorothy L. Sayers, but with the (perhaps merciful) omission of 
           the illustrations”15— the version, of course, that Bioy unsuccessfully 
           attempted to track down.
             The (nonexistent) novel tells the story of a law student who falls 
           in with the worst kind of people, men who seem not to possess the 
           slightest spark of decency. Amid such ethical squalor, the student one 
           day witnesses a single act of kindness, a “moment of tenderness . . . 
           in one of the most abominable men.” Thunderstruck, the student 
           hypothesizes that he must be seeing in this roughneck a trace of 
           goodness le. by another person— a friend the man once had, one 
           who perhaps had been likewise imprinted by another friend before 
           him— and he comes to the conclusion that “somewhere in the world 
           there is a man from whom this clarity, this brightness, emanates.”16 The 
           student  follows  the  traces  from  person  to  person  until  he  at  last 
           arrives at the store of a modest bookseller in Persia, at the back of 
           which a glowing light emanates from behind a tawdry curtain. The 
           student calls out the name he has since learned, Al- Mu’tasim; a voice 
           bids him enter and the novel ends.
             The  idea  of  being  thunderstruck  by  an  unexpected  act  of 
           decency recalls something Kant once wrote about the call of duty. 
           What astonished Kant about the moral law was how it ensured that 
           humans  would  always  be  more  than  mere  servants  to  their  base 
           desires, more than cogs in the giant machine of nature, blown every 
           which way by the ﬂuctuations of time and place. We see evidence 
           for the existence of this moral law everywhere, he said; in the least 
           impressive of our fellows, in the most abominable of men, we can 
           at times glimpse an act of righteousness, a spark of goodness. And 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   124                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              125

           when we do, Kant wrote, we can feel our spirit bow down in respect, 
           even if we wish to resist that feeling and remain aloof.17
              Like Kant, the student in Bahadur Ali’s book witnesses an unex-
           pected act of goodness and feels his spirit bow down. But then he 
           does more. Instead of recognizing there the inﬂuence of a universal 
           moral law, he decides the goodness must have a speciﬁc source, an 
           embodiment. One person who incarnates all that goodness, all that 
           selﬂessness. One person who has le. his trace on others, a trace the 
           student must follow. An incarnation of goodness in a fallen world.
              In this fragmentary, cryptic story the ﬁrst bloom emerged of a 
           radical new style nourished by the loam of ancient thought: a work 
           of ﬁction disguised as a review or scholarly article, replete with foot-
           notes mixing real and imagined sources, all in the service of excavat-
           ing some mysterious source. The mystery ignites a quest, a search for 
           some being, place, book, or poem that incarnates a unity we yearn 
           for but can never achieve— eternity, as Borges put it, in the style of 
           desire.
              Astonishingly, inevitably, what we see emerge here is the same 
           insight Kant fell upon as he sought to unify his system in the years 
           leading up to his Critique: that the very idea of temporal and spatial 
           diversity requires us to posit an ultimate unity that can never itself 
           be  the  subject  of  our  experience,  but  one  we  nonetheless  endow 
           with reality and incarnate as the object of our deepest desire. For 
           Kant that object of desire was both the motor of science and what 
           reason needs to guard against, lest we ever believe we’ve found it. 
           For Borges that object is the motor of literature, indeed of life, and 
           yet, in story a.er story, he always sounds a note of caution. For as 
           Borges would learn, to ﬁnd that object, to enter that ultimate reality, 
           is something no temporal being could ever survive.


           +%&# ('-/&* +"* $%1-$&&# years old, his father, Jorge Guillermo 
           Borges, published a trio of poems under the common title “Momen-
           tos.” In them, the disillusioned lawyer whose mother had emigrated 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   125                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           126             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           from  England  lamented  the  passing  of  time,  the  loss  of  those 
           moments of love and ecstasy that we yearn for but that then pass in 
           the blink of an eye, only to be looked back on in regret and long-
           ing.18 Perhaps under the inﬂuence of a midlife crisis, perhaps wish-
           ing to rekindle his romance with his wife, Leonor Acevedo, Jorge 
           Guillermo decided to move his family to Europe, eventually to live 
           in the country of his mother’s family. The ﬁrst stop, however, would 
           be Geneva, Switzerland. There the couple’s two children, Jorge Luis 
           and his sister (who happened to be named Norah), could stay safely 
           under the care of Leonor’s mother, while the grown-ups  toured the 
           capitals of Europe in search of lost time.
             World history upset these best- laid plans. War broke out while 
           the lovebirds toured Germany, so they rushed back to neutral Swit-
           zerland and enrolled Jorge Luis in the school founded by John Cal-
           vin. They apparently didn’t think this a necessary step for Norah, 
           who took painting lessons at home and would eventually enter the 
           École des Beaux- Arts.19 Unlike Norah, who learned to love Geneva 
           and whose French became so ﬂuent she would start inserting French 
           words into their conversations at home, Georgie didn’t thrive. Even 
           back in Argentina, speaking his own language, he had been merci-
           lessly bullied and usually kept to himself. Now with the additional 
           barrier of a language he didn’t know and didn’t show much apti-
           tude for, he became even more isolated.
             While not much better at German, he did develop more of a taste 
           for it and fell under the spell of Arthur Schopenhauer, of whom he 
           would write, “If the riddle of the universe can be stated in words, I 
           think these words would be in his writing.”20 Desiring to learn to 
           read in this new language, he chose as one of the texts Kant’s Cri-
           tique of Pure Reason. Another was the Viennese writer Gustav Mey-
           rink’s novel Der Golem, about a Czech rabbi who tries to create life 
           and produces a monster instead. Understanding the mystical crea-
           tion of life itself proved an easier li. than reading Kant. The Golem 
           ended up being the ﬁrst book in German that Borges managed to 
           read in its entirety, and it landed on fertile ground.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   126                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              127

              Around  this  time,  he  made  his  ﬁrst  friends,  two  Jewish  boys, 
           Maurice Abramowicz and Simon Jichlinski, both of whom shared 
           Borges’s love of literature and ideas. Now seventeen, he began to 
           liberate himself from the conﬁnes of his family life, staying out late 
           with his friends, caught up in rapt conversations.21 It’s possible that 
           his great a<nity for Jewish culture dates to these early friendships. 
           Indeed, Borges would later develop a passing familiarity with Jewish 
           mysticism, speciﬁcally with the writings of the Jewish philosopher 
           Gershom Scholem, whom he knew personally and named twice in 
           a poem inspired by Meyrink’s novel (although he impishly claimed 
           to have used the philosopher’s name only because he couldn’t come 
           up with any other word that rhymed with “golem”).22
              According to Hassidic lore, the method for animating a golem 
           involved inscribing the Hebrew word for truth, emet, into the crea-
           ture’s forehead. Because the creature should be destroyed immedi-
           ately upon creation, this would be done by erasing the ﬁrst letter, 
           leaving behind met, or death. The letter to be erased, and hence the 
           very  breath  of  life,  was  the  ﬁrst  letter  of  the  alphabet,  aleph.23  In 
           Borges’s poem the rabbi eyes his monstrous creation with a mixture 
           of  tenderness  and  horror,  and  asks  himself, “Why  did  I  decide  to 
           add to the inﬁnite series yet another symbol? Why to the vain skein 
           that unravels in the eternal did I add another cause, another e7ect, 
           another care?”24 This tension between the eternal and the temporal 
           world of causes and e7ect is the same one that emerged in Borges’s 
           review of Bahadur’s apocryphal novel. And in that story’s last line, 
           Borges pointed to another tradition as a precursor to this idea, the 
           same tradition he discussed in a short piece he wrote around the 
           same time called “A Defense of the Kabbalah.”
              Kabbalah refers to the practice of rabbinical interpretations that 
           posited the Torah scrolls as shadows or copies of an eternal Torah 
           written in ﬁre. Kabbalists reasoned that, unlike the letters we human 
           must contend with, scattered in times whose order we don’t under-
           stand, those of the original and eternal Torah are not subject to the 
           contingencies  of  space  and  time.  Attempting  to  reconstruct  that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   127                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           128             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           original timeless text, the kabbalists parsed the Torah through alle-
           gorical readings, numerology, and anagrams.25 The Sefer Yetzirah, or 
           Book of Creation, taught that the twenty-two  letters of the Hebrew 
           alphabet  were  God’s  building  blocks,  which  God  combined  to 
           come up with the complexity and variety of existence, starting with 
           the ﬁrst letter: “Aleph with all and all with Aleph; Beth with all and 
           all with Beth; and so each in turn. . . . [A]ll creation and all language 
           come from one name.”26 Our languages, fallen far from their divine 
           source, still carry those traces of divine inspiration; the older and 
           more sacred a language, the closer it comes to that source. Thus, in 
           the ﬁrst phoneme of the ﬁrst Hebrew letter, aleph, the kabbalists 
           found the very power of naming, of creating, of engendering life 
           itself.27
             While the time in Geneva lasted longer than Jorge Guillermo 
           had  intended, it  would  eventually  come  to  an  end. Typically, this 
           happened only once Georgie had ﬁnally grown a taste for it. Along 
           with friends, he had also found love. Emilie, of green eyes and ﬂow-
           ing red hair, a ﬁrst and chaste romance that would cast the mold 
           for a future, more devastating infatuation. His domineering mother, 
           Leonor, foreshadowing future impediments, did not approve. The 
           girl was working class. Borges’s father, who once thought sending 
           his bookish son to school with a dagger would solve his severe bul-
           lying problem, this time decided the boy should take someone to 
           bed. He gave Georgie an address in the red- light district and pushed 
           him out the door. The young man dutifully followed his father’s 
           instructions, but his anxiety mounted as he neared his goal. Not ter-
           ribly conﬁdent even under normal circumstances, Georgie failed to 
           perform. Traumatized, mortiﬁed, he went for a medical consultation 
           and was diagnosed with a weak liver. His father decided it was time 
           to leave Geneva, and Emilie, for climes that could warm up his son’s 
           tepid blood. Thus did Borges experience his ﬁrst great heartbreak.28
             Time is loss. Time is heartbreak. Time is desire for timelessness. 
           Almost thirty years later, in the wake of a more momentous a7air, 
           Borges  would  bring  this  concatenation  of  inﬂuences  and  ideas 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   128                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              129

           together in a story that would become the eponymous tale in one of 
           his most successful books and a story that for many readers around 
           the world would come to exemplify his unique literary vision. In 
           that story he imagined a villa in Buenos Aires where a mysterious 
           object lay hidden under the cellar stairs. A disk only a few centime-
           ters in diameter, containing within it all the space of the cosmos 
           “with no diminution of size.”29
              Fittingly, he called that object an Aleph.


           1# “$%& "2&!%,” ('-/&*’* alter ego comes across (perhaps all too 
           accurately  in  some  respects)  as  a  snobbish  wet  blanket  of  a  man, 
           haunting the villa and family of his departed beloved, Beatriz Vit-
           erbo. The villa, now inhabited by her poet cousin Carlos Argentino 
           Daneri, has become Beatriz’s de facto mausoleum. But the price he 
           pays for the license reluctantly given to him to visit is having to read, 
           and worse react to, Carlos Argentino’s atrocious poetry. It turns out 
           the man has nothing less in his sights than a poetic compendium, 
           in  almost  no  discernible  order,  of  everything  in  existence.  At  the 
           time of Borges’s telling, he has put into verse such sundry climes as 
           a stretch of the Ob River, a gas reﬁnery in Veracruz, several hectares 
           of land in Queensland, “and a Turkish bath not far from the famed 
           Brighton Aquarium.”30
              Carlos Argentino’s production of peripatetic poetry comes to a 
           screeching halt when he calls the character Borges in a panic to tell 
           him that his house is slated to be demolished by the property own-
           ers. While Borges begins to protest in horror at the loss of this shrine 
           to Beatriz, Carlos Argentino praters on, bemoaning that the destruc-
           tion of the house will make it impossible to write his poem. This is 
           because, he clariﬁes to Borges, in one corner of the cellar there is an 
           Aleph, “one of the points in space that contain all points.”31
              Borges’s confusion quickly morphs into the suspicion that Car-
           los Argentino must be mad, which doesn’t stop him from heading 
           over to the villa to witness his psychotic breakdown in person. It is 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   129                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           130             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           only a.er making his way down the darkened stairs and lying on the 
           cellar ﬂoor at Carlos Argentino’s bidding that he realizes his folly, 
           that he has allowed himself to be “locked underground by a mad-
           man, a.er ﬁrst drinking down a sni.er of poison.”32 He closes his 
           eyes for a moment, and the thought swi.ly departs when he opens 
           them and sees the Aleph.
             At  this  point, he  says, his  telling  of  the  tale  runs  into  an  irre-
           solvable roadblock, “the enumeration, even partial enumeration, of 
           inﬁnity.”33 The Aleph, he writes, “was probably two or three centi-
           meters in diameter, but universal space was contained inside it, with 
           no diminution in size. Each thing (the glass surface of a mirror, let 
           us say) was inﬁnite things, because I could clearly see it from every 
           point in the cosmos.”34
             Here follows one of the most captivating poetic lists in literary 
           history, as Borges attempts what he has already declared impossible, 
           namely, to enumerate the inﬁnite. He details an extraordinary pano-
           ply of random moments and experiences, memories and perspec-
           tives, writing,

             I . . . saw a silvery spiderweb at the center of a black pyramid, . . . 
             saw convex equatorial deserts and their every grain of sand, . . . 
             saw a copy of the ﬁrst English translation of Pliny (Philemon 
             Holland’s), saw every letter of every page at once . . . , saw tigers, 
             pistons, bisons, tides, and armies, saw all the ants on earth, . . . 
             saw the horrendous remains of what had once, deliciously, been 
             Beatriz Viterbo, saw the circulation of my dark blood, . . . saw the 
             Aleph from everywhere at once, saw the earth in the Aleph, and 
             the Aleph once more in the earth and the earth in the Aleph, saw 
             my face and my viscera, saw your face, and I felt dizzy, and I wept, 
             because my eyes had seen that secret, hypothetical object whose 
             name has been usurped by men but which no man has ever truly 
             looked upon: the inconceivable universe.35

             This existence of everything, in the blink of an eye. The incon-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   130                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              131

           ceivable  universe,  out  there,  at  this  very  instant.  Here,  in  one 
           extraordinary  run- on sentence,  Borges  managed  to  encapsulate  a 
           philosophical insight that catapulted him from the intimacy of love 
           and  loss  to  the  edges  of  the  knowable  universe.  This  insight  had 
           coursed through the hidden veins of culture and science from Plato 
           through Jewish mysticism to Christian revelation, from the Critique 
           of  Kant  that  he  had  read  as  a  child  to  learn  German  to  the  very 
           principle  that  Werner Heisenberg  had  unleashed  contemporane-
           ously with Borges’s own brief moment of happiness, the ﬂow of an 
           a.ernoon in life that he had hoped to capture and transmute into 
           eternity.
              This  is  the  insight  that  the  Aleph  expressed. To have  a  self, to 
           experience anything at all, required the existence of the vast total-
           ity of space around him, of a past preceding him and a future yet 
           to come. And yet that secret, hypothetical object, the inconceivable 
           universe, was destined to remain hypothetical, secret, forever.


           "$ " !"-$, %'*$&8 by Bioy in the winter of 1944, Borges met Estela 
           Canto.36  A  journalist  who  was  enjoying  a  rising  reputation  as  a 
           writer, Estela appreciated Borges’s work but was unimpressed by his 
           frumpy appearance, not to mention his apparent lack of interest in 
           her. This changed when they met by chance on their way to another 
           evening gathering at Bioy’s house, and Borges suggested they walk 
           together for a few blocks. The walk ended up taking several hours 
           and led to a drink at a local bar. At one point in their conversation 
           Estela quoted Bernard Shaw in English. This clearly caught Borg-
           es’s attention, for she later recalled he mentioned speciﬁcally that it 
           was the ﬁrst time he had “come across a woman who likes Bernard 
           Shaw.”37
              The two began to meet occasionally to stroll the city’s streets. It 
           was on one of these walks that Borges conﬁded to Estela that he was 
           at work on a story about “a place that contained all other places in 
           the world.”38 On another occasion he showed up unannounced at 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   131                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           132             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           her apartment with a gi.. It was, he told her, an Aleph, and it would 
           show her “all the objects in the world.” When she undid the wrap-
           ping, all she found was a kaleidoscope. Her confusion did nothing 
           to dampen his enthusiasm, however, and he babbled on about how 
           he planned to make the story he was working on the ﬁrst of many 
           he would dedicate to her.39
             Borges soon became ﬁxated on the idea of Estela as his version of 
           Dante’s Beatrice, the girl the poet fell in love with, who died young 
           and would reappear in his Divine Comedy to lead the poet from the 
           depths of the inferno to the apotheosis of God’s paradise. In that 
           association he was certainly helped along by her name. Estela is a 
           name derived from Latin and old French meaning star. Each volume 
           of the Divine Comedy ends with the same words, le stelle, the stars. 
           The theme reached its climax in March 1945, when Borges invited 
           Estela on an outing to a town just to the south of the capital where 
           he had summered with his family as a child and spent a few, rare 
           happy moments. Speciﬁcally, he wanted to take her to an inn, the 
           Hotel Las Delicias. The inn had seen better days. As Estela would 
           later recall, “The dining room, vast and badly lit, was almost empty. 
           The food on the ﬁxed- price menu was as bad as might be expected 
           in a boardinghouse.” Still, she noted, none of this seemed to bother 
           him, and “he was happy and excited in this old dining room, which 
           had been robbed of its former splendor.”40
             As  they  ate  the  mediocre  fare  and  then  later  made  their  way 
           across  the  equally  shabby  grounds,  Borges  cited  passages  from 
           Dante’s Paradiso in which Beatrice guides the poet to the mystic rose 
           at the heart of God’s eternal heaven, “which holds / the center still 
           and moves all else around it.”41 In that vision, Dante described look-
           ing up at the center of all creation, where he “saw a point that sent 
           forth so acute / a light, that anyone who faced the force / with which 
           it blazed would have to shut his eyes, / and any star that, seen from 
           earth, would seem / to be the smallest, set beside that point, as star 
           conjoined with star, would seem a moon.”42 Reveling in the ecstasy 
           of Dante’s ethereal lines, Borges dropped to his knees and popped 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   132                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              133

           the question.
              “I’d be very happy to, Georgie,” Estela replied, “but don’t forget 
           that I’m a disciple of Bernard Shaw. We cannot get married without 
           ﬁrst going to bed with each other.”43
              While Borges at ﬁrst took Estela’s answer to be an a<rmation, he 
           apparently found it di<cult to deliver the goods. His mode of court-
           ship soon devolved into inviting Estela to tea at the home he shared 
           with his mother, whose snobbery irritated Estela mercilessly. In the 
           end, she would blame the old dame’s behavior and Borges’s cloy-
           ing attachment to her for having “destroyed any possibility” of their 
           relationship developing further.44 In the meantime, though, Estela’s 
           presence in his life had given enough wings to his imagination for 
           him to ﬁnally produce a successful story collection titled The Aleph.


           "$ $%& '0$*&$  '3 his  essay  on  eternity,  Borges  made  a  passing, 
           almost unnoticeable mention of something that had occurred some 
           two  decades  earlier  in  a  patent  o<ce  in  Bern,  Switzerland.  From 
           that o<ce burst a “relativist scare” that brought to light the problem 
           of “synchronizing  each  person’s  individual  time  with  the  general 
           time  of  mathematicians.”45  Indeed,  one  of  the  most  profound  of 
           Einstein’s discoveries in 1905 had been that our common notion 
           of universal time had no basis in reality. This notion, codiﬁed by 
           Newton in the image of God’s clock ticking away behind all human 
           perceptions and actions, seems, at ﬁrst glance, an obvious assump-
           tion to make about reality: namely, that it exists, “out there,” as a vast, 
           simultaneous now. For each of us, this vast now consists of the form 
           of the mental images we make of whatever else is happening in the 
           world right now, at this very moment. My children asleep upstairs 
           as I write these words; my friend in Boston making his morning 
           co7ee; my wife in Austria already up and about in the city; the Per-
           severance rover making its way across the surface of Mars; the James 
           Webb Space Telescope training its mirrors on the origins of space 
           and time. The problem is that vast now can only ever be a men-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   133                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           134             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           tal construction. That’s because information, all information, takes 
           time to travel. So, if I could look up through the ceiling to my kids, 
           the information that they are sleeping would take some (admittedly, 
           absurdly short) time to reach me. If my friend in Boston were to 
           FaceTime with me while making his co7ee, my experience would 
           be imperceptibly delayed; slightly more for my wife in Austria. At 
           1.5 million kilometers away, the JWST would send emissions sub-
           jected to a noticeable lag. For its part the poor rover’s rovings could 
           take more than twenty minutes  to arrive at my computer screen, 
           depending on where Earth and Mars were in their orbits.
             So, this vast present moment extends around us like an almost 
           inﬁnitely  wide  and  inﬁnitely  thin  disk  of  space- time and  we  just 
           can’t see it, right? Not exactly. While in the classical Newtonian view 
           of  the  cosmos  it  makes  sense  to  talk  about  a  stable  reality  being 
           shared right now throughout space, Einstein showed that this idea 
           really depended on our ability to measure time and compare those 
           measurements with one another. And this, of course, requires send-
           ing messages back and forth. Thus, it makes no sense to ask whether 
           events are indeed happening at the same time or if they in fact hap-
           pened at successive times until we measure them and communicate 
           those measurements. But since measuring and comparing take time, 
           not only can deciding if events were simultaneous only occur at a 
           later time, whether they were in fact simultaneous will also change 
           if one or both of the parties doing the measuring are in motion with 
           respect to the other.46 In other words, it turns out that there is no 
           stable reality coinciding with what we imagine the present moment, 
           out there in space, to be. Like Heisenberg’s electron, it doesn’t exist 
           until we observe it.
             And  still,  we  imagine  it.  Like  the  Aleph  below  the  stairs,  we 
           project the vast, inconceivable universe outward in space with every 
           thought and every observation we make, just as we require a past 
           from which we stem and a future toward which we hope. Such pro-
           jections aren’t arbitrary; they are implied by the most minimal expe-
           rience. Yet to treat them as though they existed in that form on their 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   134                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                              In the Blink of an Eye              135

           own, outside our experience, is to treat our image of the universe, 
           which contains all space and time, as if it were something in space 
           and time. To treat it, in other words, as if it were real.
              It isn’t. And yet the dream of its reality has captivated the world 
           from time immemorial and continues to hold us in its spell today.
              From the darkened streets of his memories of loss, as he gazed 
           hopefully onto vistas of new promise, Borges made out the contours 
           of a poetic, scientiﬁc, and philosophical vision that had the power to 
           shatter that spell. It was a vision that would unite physics and ethics 
           in a strange, new architecture of the cosmos and an ultimate vindi-
           cation of human freedom. But before reaching that point, Borges 
           would follow that vision into a new antinomy, to the very paradoxi-
           cal edge of a boundless universe, a universe he could start to glimpse 
           from the twilight of his advancing blindness and the intricate pas-
           sageways of a seemingly inﬁnite library.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   135                                2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   136                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                          Part III

                               DOES THE UNIVERSE 
                                              HAVE AN EDGE?


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   137                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:36
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   138                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                       7

                            THE UNIVERSE              
                      (WHICH OTHERS CALL  
                             THE LIBRARY)


                  '#/  (&3'-& %& /"1#&8 fame as one of the world’s most 
                  beloved writers of children’s ﬁction, C. S. Lewis earned his 
           Lreputation as a scholar of medieval literature. He taught this 
           subject ﬁrst at Oxford University before moving to Cambridge in 
           1954 to assume the newly created Chair of Medieval and Renais-
           sance Literature, a position he would hold for the rest of his career. 
           One of the subjects Lewis lectured on at both storied schools was 
           how people in the Middle Ages imagined the cosmos.
              Like Kant, Lewis was ﬁlled with awe by the starry skies above. On 
           occasion he would invite his students to walk with him at night and 
           look up at those skies, and challenge them to cast aside their accus-
           tomed, modern way of viewing the heavens. “Whatever else a mod-
           ern feels when he looks at the night sky,” he would tell them, “he 
           certainly feels that he is looking out— like one looking out from the 
           saloon entrance on to the dark Atlantic or from the lighted porch 
           upon  dark  and  lonely  moors.” But  the  cosmos  didn’t  appear  that 
           way to the poets and natural philosophers of the Middle Ages, Lewis 
           went on to explain. If you succeeded in seeing with medieval eyes, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   139                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           140             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           he told them, “you would feel like one looking in.”1
             What could it mean to look out at the night sky, or any sky for 
           that matter, and feel that we are looking in? To do this, we might 
           begin by imagining that the surface of the earth on which we stand 
           is not curved convexly, bending away from the soles of our feet, but 
           rather concavely, like the inside of a bowl, such that, way out there, 
           beyond any visible horizon, the earth’s surface slopes gently up to 
           eventually encompass everything we see. In this inverted cosmos, no 
           matter where we stood on the surface of the earth, we could stare 
           straight up and point toward the exact same point. But even if we 
           could manage to twist our minds around this way, we would surely 
           be tempted to wonder why anyone would concoct such a bizarre 
           cosmic  architecture.  The  reason  medievals  did  so  stemmed  from 
           a long- standing debate about what it meant for the cosmos to be 
           somewhere at all.
             University life in thirteenth- century Europe was dominated by 
           a movement now known as Scholasticism. The Scholastics’ primary 
           aim was to reconcile the teachings of Aristotle—whose  works had 
           arrived  in  Europe  via  the  translations  and  commentaries  of  Arab 
           philosophers— with their own culture’s dominant Christian theol-
           ogy. One of the ideas they adopted from Aristotle was his physical 
           model of the heavens: imagine our earth as a giant marble encased 
           in multiple, nesting, perfectly smooth layers of glass, each moving 
           independently  of  the  one  below  it  and  carrying  the  orbs  we  see 
           above us in the sky— the sun, the moon, the planets, the blanket 
           of stars. The outermost of these spheres imparted its motion to the 
           others without itself needing another sphere to contain it and give 
           it motion. This primum mobile, or ﬁrst mover, appealed mightily to 
           Christians, just as it had to its Muslim importers—not  least because 
           it seemed to o7er a physical embodiment of a popular and intuitive 
           proof for the existence of God (who was, a.er all, a pretty good can-
           didate for the ultimate cause for which no other cause is needed).
             While  God  as  the  ﬁrst  mover  made  for  a  ni.y  trick,  reconcil-
           ing all of Aristotle’s teachings with Christian ideas was more of a 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   140                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  141

           stretch. A particularly thorny problem arose from Aristotle’s deﬁni-
           tion of what constitutes where something is. The place something 
           occupies, he believed, is “the innermost, motionless surface of the 
           containing body in direct contact with the contained body.”2 This 
           was  important  because  it  helped  explain  the  concept  of  motion: 
           namely, an object’s change in relation to its place. But if the outer-
           most container of the cosmos itself had no container, how could it 
           be said to move? Even more nerve- racking, if the cosmos as a whole 
           had nothing surrounding it, might one not infer that it is impos-
           sible for anyone, even God, to move it?
              In 1277 the bishop of Paris, one Stephen Tempier, had an answer 
           for the Scholastics. He issued a proclamation ordering the univer-
           sity professors to stop instructing God what He couldn’t do. The 
           list of 219 Condemnations in the bishop’s decree covered an enor-
           mous array of topics and censored speciﬁc books, but a good chunk 
           of them dealt with the irksome (for the ecclesiastical authorities) 
           hubris of philosophers who thought they had the standing to decide 
           on God’s limitations.
              So God could, it seemed, make the cosmos move, even if there 
           were nothing outside the cosmos in which to make it move. This 
           then raised the head- scratching question of relative to what, exactly, 
           the cosmos was moving. Luckily, the Scholastics had a number of 
           thinkers to whom they could turn for help— speciﬁcally the Arab 
           commentators and translators who had brought Aristotle’s teach-
           ings to Europe. The most inﬂuential of these was named Ibn Rushd, 
           a twel.h- century polymath from the south of Spain whose inter-
           pretations  of  Aristotle  were  so  widely  read  and  respected  that  he 
           became known as the Arab Aristotle.
              As a young man Ibn Rushd had been called into the presence 
           of the sultan, himself a learned man, who had shown great inter-
           est in discussing deep theological questions. A.er some pleasantries 
           and general inquiries about his family and provenance, the sultan 
           jumped  right  into  the  deep  end  and,  to  the  young  philosopher’s 
           considerable alarm, asked him what people were saying about the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   141                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           142             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           heavens, speciﬁcally, “Are they eternal or created?”3 Not surprisingly, 
           Ibn Rushd had given this some thought. Indeed, his answer would 
           ultimately leave its enduring imprint on Christian as well as Islamic 
           theology.  Aristotle  had  believed  that  the  earth  and  the  system  of 
           crystalline spheres encapsulating it had existed for all time. Mono-
           theists like Ibn Rushd and his sultan, however, believed that God 
           had created the cosmos, which seemed to suggest that it had a begin-
           ning in time. Ibn Rushd’s response to this apparent contradiction 
           was, in essence, to have his cake and eat it too. The cosmos was both 
           eternal and created by God.
             Crucially, this solution had consequences for the place of the cos-
           mos as well. Aristotle’s giant system of nested crystalline spheres had 
           nothing around it. But nothing couldn’t really exist— nature, as the 
           philosopher had taught, abhors a vacuum. So, what would you ﬁnd 
           if you managed to work your way to that outermost layer and tried 
           to stick your hand out beyond it? Ibn Rushd’s approach solved this 
           tricky question too. For just as the cosmos could be eternal— and 
           hence have no beginning or edge in time— and yet still have been 
           created by God, the cosmos could exist in space with nothing out-
           side it— and hence have no edge in space— and yet still be some-
           thing objectively movable for God. The cosmos could be said to be 
           moving because its place was not determined by an external physi-
           cal container; rather, it was determined by the very center it revolved 
           around.4 The cosmos was contained by its own central point.
             Ibn Rushd’s model, while not fully adopted by the theologians, 
           had  remarkable  staying  power.  It  was  the  model  C.  S.  Lewis  had 
           in mind when he tried to reorient his students to medieval ways 
           of viewing the heavens, although Lewis had his version not from 
           Ibn Rushd but from its adaptation by Dante. As he wrote in The 
           Discarded Image, “A few astonishing lines from the Paradiso . . . stamp 
           this [image] on the mind forever. . . . The universe is thus, when our 
           minds are su<ciently freed from the senses, turned inside out.”5
             The  Italian  poet’s Divine  Comedy  recounts  in  ﬁrst  person  the 
           mystical  journey  of  his  alter  ego  through  the  gates  of  hell  down 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   142                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  143

           through its nine circles to the lowest point of creation, literally the 
           nether parts of Lucifer, buried upside down in ice. From the nadir 
           of creation that is Satan’s scrotum, the poet describes ascending to 
           the surface of the earth, up the mountain of purgatory, and from 
           there begins, in the third book, his ascent to the pinnacle of para-
           dise. Improbably, bewilderingly, Dante managed to inscribe in his 
           journey the model of a cosmos whose center is its own container.
              To pass from the earth to the center point of the heavens, one 
           must come to a point where one’s orientation ﬂips, where what was 
           up becomes down. More essentially, if even harder to put into words, 
           one’s  outward  movement  must  also  ﬂip  and  become  an  inward 
           movement— such that  no  matter  what  direction  one  chooses  to 
           gaze, one is looking at the same central point. In a key passage in 
           Paradiso, Dante manages to do both. Arriving at the upper reaches 
           of the sky, he describes a point where “our atmosphere . . . sprinkles 
           snowﬂakes downward with its frozen mists,” and yet now, instead of 
           the snow falling downward, he sees “the upper air adorned, snow-
           ﬂaking upward with triumphant mists that for a while had stayed 
           with  us  there.”6  There  in  the  heights,  among  the  snowﬂakes  sus-
           pended  in  indecision  about  which  way  to  fall,  the  pilgrim  looks 
           down as the sun races by below his feet. He turns helplessly to his 
           beloved, who urges him to step “onto the swi.est heaven . . . whose 
           nearest and most exalted parts are all so uniform, I cannot tell which 
           Beatrice selected as my place.”7
              Indeed, it does not and cannot matter where Dante steps onto 
           the primum mobile, the swi.est heaven, for in the architecture he 
           has created for this journey, all paths outward converge on the same 
           point:

                    The nature of the universe, which holds
                    the center still and moves all else around it,
                    begins here as if from its turning- post.
                    And this heaven has no other where than this:
                    the mind of God, in which are kindled both


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   143                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           144             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

                   the love that turns it and the force it rains.
                   Only one circle’s light and love enclose it,
                   as it encloses the rest— and that precinct
                   only He who girds it understands.
                   No other heaven measures this sphere’s motion
                   but it serves as the measure for the rest.8

             Gazing  up  and  outward,  Dante  sees  the  enclosing  circles  of 
           heaven around him become progressively smaller and more intense 
           in light and joy until, ultimately, his eyes ﬁnd that one central point, 
           inﬁnitely small and inﬁnitely bright, that, paradoxically, encloses all 
           of existence in its embrace.
             It was to this eternal solace— this “amazing and angelic temple 
           that has as boundaries only love and light,” this self- contained cos-
           mos that knows no outside in space or before or a.er in time— that 
           Borges’s mind ﬂed as he contemplated the bad inﬁnity of words on 
           pages, pages in books, and books on shelf a.er dusty shelf lining 
           the municipal library whose outdated catalogs it was now his job 
           to maintain.9


           '# H"#0"-, I, 4BFI, ('-/&* began to work at the Miguel Cané 
           municipal library. With no university degree and no prior experience 
           other than poorly paid, part- time writing work for literary journals, 
           he was in no position to be choosy. And so he found himself walk-
           ing ten blocks to take a tram across town to one of Buenos Aires’s 
           less desirable neighborhoods, where he would spend his days cata-
           loging the sparse collection. Had he the space to himself, he might 
           have appreciated it more, but he was far from alone. There were, he 
           would later recount, “some ﬁ.y of us doing what ﬁ.een could easily 
           have done.”10 To make matters worse, his co-workers  weren’t exactly 
           bookworms. They spent their days chatting about soccer and bet-
           ting on horses, when they weren’t busy harassing the female patrons. 
           One day one of them happened to spy the name Jorge Luis Borges 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   144                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  145

           in a biographical note. Rather than be amazed to ﬁnd out their col-
           league was a writer, the men laughed about the coincidence of the 
           shared name. Borges also drew his co-workers’  ire when at ﬁrst he 
           logged too many books. He would need to slow down, they told 
           him, unless he wanted them all to be out a paycheck.11
              There  was  one  bright  side  to  his  new  job.  What  it  lacked  in 
           challenge, interest, or pay it more than made up for in free time. 
           Exhausting  his  limited  quota  of  books  shortly  a.er  arriving  each 
           day, Borges was free to ﬁll his remaining time reading the few titles 
           he could ﬁnd of any literary value or jotting down his own ideas. 
           Indeed, some of the foment leading to his literary explosion in the 
           early 1940s came from these days lost among the unread books of 
           an underused library on the south side of Buenos Aires. For the time 
           being he also had one other position that at least provided some con-
           nection to the literary world: editing a biweekly section on books 
           for the magazine El Hogar. But in December of that year, something 
           happened that would deprive him of even those small blessings.
              Borges shared an apartment with his mother, Leonor, as he would 
           continue to do until her death years later. On Christmas Eve she sent 
           him to fetch a young woman who was to have dinner with them. 
           Running late, Borges ascended the darkened stairs of the girl’s apart-
           ment building in a rush, only to smash his head on a window frame 
           that had swung out into the stairwell. At ﬁrst he tried to recover 
           at home, but soon he became feverish and even lost his power of 
           speech. At the hospital the doctors diagnosed him with septicemia; 
           for a while it was far from clear that he would survive. Even a.er he 
           recovered, Borges feared he would su7er some permanent damage 
           to his mental abilities, and he became even more focused on writing 
           something new, something that would make a name for himself.12
              The story he wrote during his convalescence wore the guise of a 
           scholarly article about some recently unearthed pages by an obscure 
           French writer named Pierre Menard. Absurdly, the work in question 
           included the Frenchman’s reproduction, verbatim, of two chapters 
           plus another fragment of Cervantes’s great novel, Don Quixote. These 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   145                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           146             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           were  not  simply  a  modern  version  of  the  Spanish  master’s  work, 
           the story’s author insisted. Nor were they, perish the thought, mere 
           copies. No, Pierre Menard had labored for years, writing countless 
           dra.s, all toward the end of producing “a number of pages which 
           coincided— word for word and line for line—with  those of Miguel 
           de Cervantes.”13
             Menard,  Borges  writes,  contemplated  a  number  of  ways  for 
           accomplishing his goal. He could, for example, endeavor to forget 
           his nationality, his language, and three hundred years of history so 
           as  to become  Miguel  de  Cervantes. No, he  decides, that  would  be 
           too easy. Or rather, of the many ways in which the task was impos-
           sible, that would be the least interesting. It challenged Menard far 
           more to arrive at Cervantes’s exact words while remaining a French-
           man  of  the  twentieth  century,  thus  overcoming  the  cultural  dif-
           ferences, the history that had passed, and all the literary events in 
           between— including, most vexingly, the publication of Don Quixote 
           itself. In an ironic coup de grâce, Borges transcribes a passage from 
           Cervantes’s original novel and juxtaposes it with the identical pas-
           sage from Pierre Menard’s version, ignoring the perfect repetition 
           of the texts to extol the improvements of the latter. He professes to 
           be impressed, for example, by Menard’s use of an archaic style in a 
           foreign language, in contrast to the relative banality of Cervantes’s 
           reliance on “the Spanish of his time.”14
             With “Pierre Menard,” Borges delved into the nature of creativity, 
           of originality, a topic that concerned him greatly. Early in the story, 
           the narrator quotes the French author’s own notes, in which he put 
           his creation on a par with the greatest of the ages and with the most 
           far- reaching philosophical or theological proofs. The ﬁnal term of 
           such  a  proof,  he  wrote,  whatever  that  term  may  be—“the  world 
           around us, or God, or chance, or universal Forms— is no more ﬁnal, 
           no more uncommon, than my revealed novel.”15 The sole di7erence, 
           Menard  went  on  to  explain,  is  that  while “philosophers  publish 
           pleasant volumes containing the intermediate stages of their work,” 
           he had erased the work he had done, the multiple, even countless 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   146                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  147

           dra.s of his production.16 Menard, in other words, had realized the 
           famous parable of monkeys with typewriters and simply condensed 
           inﬁnite time in order to produce the desired outcome. “The task I 
           have undertaken is not in essence di<cult,” he noted. “If I could just 
           be immortal, I could do it.”17 Individuality, style, creativity— none 
           of this mattered, it seemed, for given su<cient time, all books that 
           could be written would be, simply by random chance. Nothing in 
           the universe could truly be original, for everything can be generated 
           by chance.
              Borges published his story in May 1939, a.er some months of 
           convalescing from his injury. That summer he lost his editorial job 
           at El Hogar, leaving him nothing but his pitiful position and even 
           more pitiful salary as assistant librarian. Following on the heels of 
           “Pierre Menard,” Borges wrote an essay that made explicit the same 
           anxiety about artistic originality that had imbued the former story. 
           In this case, the setting was a library.
              In  that  essay  Borges  picked  up  a  theme  he  had  learned  from 
           his earlier readings on the Kabbalah, according to which God had 
           made the universe out of a combination of letters. He noted that 
           from Aristotle on thinkers had been fascinated with the idea that 
           given  a  set  of  homogeneous  elements  di7ering  only  in  position, 
           order, and form, with enough time one could construct an entire 
           world. While the Greek philosopher Leucippus would famously call 
           these homogeneous elements atoms, and claim that all of existence 
           originates from the random collision of such basic beings, his ideas 
           would later be ridiculed by other thinkers, among them the Roman 
           orator Cicero, who countered that “if . . . the twenty- one letters of 
           the alphabet . . . were thrown together onto the ground . . . I doubt 
           whether chance could possibly create even a single verse to read.”18
              Cicero’s  challenge  was  pounced  on  by  generations  to  follow, 
           leading to the most famous version of the thought experiment, in 
           which a “half- dozen monkeys provided with typewriters would, in 
           a  few  eternities,  produce  all  the  books  in  the  British  Museum.”19 
           It was Lewis Carroll who pointed out that because the number of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   147                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           148             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           combinations,  while  enormous,  is  ﬁnite,  there  must  be  an  upper 
           limit to the number of possible books that can be written. Given 
           enough time, the question would ultimately become not what book 
           shall I write, but which of the inﬁnite books already written shall 
           I repeat. (As the comic George Carlin once asked, Why do people 
           keep telling me to put it in my own words when they’re the same 
           damn words everyone else uses?)
             Lost in his municipal library, lost in life, Borges was beginning to 
           question if he could ever put anything in his own words, if he would 
           ever write anything of consequence. Perhaps no creation could ever 
           be of consequence. Perhaps nothing new whatsoever could be fash-
           ioned in a world whose limited materials combined over an appar-
           ently inﬁnite time. In fact, he had encountered this very harrowing 
           idea  while  reading  the  German  philosopher  Friedrich  Nietzsche. 
           Nietzsche, who had lost his mind before dying of pneumonia the 
           year a.er Borges’s birth, proposed this notion in his prophetic book 
           Thus Spoke Zarathustra. The number of atoms in the world being 
           ﬁnite, he said, “in an inﬁnite stretch of time, the number of possible per-
           mutations must be run through, and the universe has to repeat itself.”20 
           Indeed, it must repeat itself, and in fact has been repeating itself, 
           eternally.
             Nietzsche’s point in devising this logical fairy tale (or nightmare, 
           depending on your outlook) was to create the backdrop for his exis-
           tentialist prototype, the famous Übermensch who would brave the 
           cosmic absurdity of the eternal recurrence of the same and accept or, 
           better yet, a<rm his destiny, forever willing himself to live the same 
           life, repeatedly, throughout eternity. But Borges, being Borges, had 
           nothing quite so heroic in mind.
             A.er acknowledging the inconceivable astronomical lengths of 
           time one would need to attain before even one perfect repetition 
           of the universe’s arrangement of ﬁnite particles would take place, 
           Borges adds a slight yet decisive disturbance into the mix. Partisans 
           of the eternal recurrence forget, he reminds us, “that memory would 
           import a novelty that negates the hypothesis.”21 Just as the percep-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   148                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  149

           tion of a moment is impossible without a self who connects that 
           moment with another and who, hence, by deﬁnition is never wholly 
           in that moment— just as a memory can never be a perfect repetition 
           of a moment of the past without ceasing to become a memory and 
           simply becoming that moment in the past— the perfect repetition of 
           all things is utterly meaningless without someone present at both 
           moments who can register that repetition. And yet that same pres-
           ence destroys the perfection of the repetition. The very element that 
           allows for the fantasy of inﬁnite repetition of the same is, by neces-
           sity, something new, and hence not a repetition.
              Borges  then  presses  his  advantage  even  further.  The  very  pre-
           sumption of inﬁnite time and, for that matter, inﬁnite space that 
           permits Nietzsche’s speculations is but a mere fantasy born of that 
           observer who inevitably imports something new and di7erent into 
           every  repetition, every  recollection. For  no  one  has  ever  observed 
           inﬁnity. Inﬁnity is nothing other than the incapacity of beings who 
           inhabit time and space to imagine an edge, a border, an end point 
           to  that  time  and  space.  Talking about  the  inﬁnite  time  in  which 
           things must eventually recur has no more meaning than referring 
           to the “Inﬁnity to My Right.” In other words, Borges adds, “if time is 
           inﬁnite to our intuition, so is space.”22
              With this twist Borges invoked none other than Immanuel Kant. 
           Space and time, as Kant wrote, are the necessary forms taken by our 
           intuition of an otherwise chaotic inﬂux of sensory data. This explains 
           why Borges’s next step was to unpack Kant’s ﬁrst antinomy, the prob-
           lem of whether the universe has a beginning in time or an edge in 
           space. For, as Kant showed, if we conceive of the universe as if it were 
           an object in time and space, we run headﬁrst into an impossible 
           contradiction. When we imagine it being ﬁnite, we come to its edge 
           in time or in space. But that edge must be somewhere, and hence we 
           are forced to imagine something beyond it. However, when we try 
           to imagine the universe without a limit, encompassing all time and 
           all space, our imagination fails, and we are still forced to ask where it 
           is, or what came before. But the universe is not a thing in time and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   149                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           150             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           space that can be either ﬁnite or inﬁnite; the antinomy is provoked 
           by thinking of it as if it were. The questioner, the observer, brings 
           something unique, namely, a ﬁnite self, to each and every percep-
           tion in time and space; this very observer produces bad inﬁnities 
           the moment he or she tries to step into the shoes of the god of very 
           large things by transforming the limited connecting of moments 
           and places necessary for any perception into the unlimited realm of 
           everything at all times.
             And this move, this unwarranted expansion, Borges realized, is 
           exactly  analogous  to  the  one  Nietzsche  performed  when  he  con-
           ceived  of  the  eternal  recurrence  of  the  same. For, “without  a  spe-
           cial archangel to keep track, what does it mean that we are going 
           through the thirteen thousand ﬁve hundred and fourteenth cycle 
           and not the ﬁrst in the series or number three hundred twenty- two 
           to the two thousandth power?”23 There is no such special archangel, 
           of course, no external and independent standard against which to 
           measure our observations. But like Kant’s anchors along the river of 
           change that is our life, our desire to assume the perspective of such 
           a bedrock standard becomes the driving force of our science. At the 
           same time, the fact that we never can occupy that ultimate vantage 
           is also the guarantee that our drive for knowledge will never end.
             How do we avoid falling into the trap of thinking that the god 
           of very large things is out there, in space, in time? How do we avoid 
           turning our incapacity to conceive of a beginning to time into a 
           monstrous paradoxical recurrence digesting every individual e7ort 
           into  the  uniformity  of  random  cosmic  excrement,  the  moronic 
           product of a galactic orchestra of monkey ﬁngers blindly bashing 
           away on meaningless keys?
             Borges pondered this mystery on endless commutes, these dol-
           drums ostensibly brightened by the working man’s holiday bonus 
           of a two- pound package of maté, the strong herbal tea Argentines 
           sip obsessively from the gourds they carry with them almost every-
           where they go. As he hauled his satchel of herbs the ten blocks from 
           the  tram  station  toward  his  lonely  bed,  Borges’s  eyes  would  well 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   150                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  151

           with  tears  as  he  realized  how  these  paltry  tokens  served  only  to 
           underscore his menial existence. Overwhelming, ponderous tedium, 
           hammered home by his employer’s attempted kindness. His literary 
           friends wondered what had happened. Was this some ironic ploy, a 
           great writer’s witticism written onto the pages of his life? Unfortu-
           nately not. For Borges, at this time, such toil was all he could hold 
           down.24
              And still, in the hours of freedom found in the library’s basement 
           or on its roo.op, away from the banter about soccer and women, 
           or on the evening tram, clattering along darkening streets back to 
           the apartment he shared with his mother, reading was what saved 
           him. Speciﬁcally Dante’s Divine Comedy, whose poetic depiction of 
           the journey from the midpoint of one man’s particular time and 
           place to God’s universal, central, all- encompassing presence outside 
           the warp and we. of time granted him “one of the most vivid liter-
           ary experiences” of his life.25 Indeed, not only the story but the very 
           structure of Dante’s solution to the problem of the place of the uni-
           verse opened a door for Borges.
              There is only one way to close o7 the regression into the inﬁnite 
           that occurs when we assume the vantage of the god of very large 
           things, he thought. It is to understand, with Dante, with Saint Augus-
           tine, with Plotinus before them, that non in tempore sed cum tempore 
           incepit creatio— the creation begins not in time but with time. As 
           Borges  wrote  in  the  essay  inspired  by  the  monotony  of  stacking 
           the shelves at the Miguel Cané, our world has but one chance to 
           escape that subaltern horror, that “vast, contradictory Library, whose 
           vertical  wildernesses  of  books  run  the  incessant  risk  of  changing 
           into others that a<rm, deny, and confuse everything like a delirious 
           god.”26 That way is this: we must describe for it an alternate architec-
           ture, a paradoxical geometry whose notation was only worked out 
           in the late nineteenth century but whose concepts have permeated 
           the mystic and theological musings of poets and philosophers alike 
           since time immemorial. That world, our library, was ﬁnite, yes, but 
           boundless as well, its architecture inverted such that its center was 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   151                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           152             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           everywhere, and its circumference, nowhere.


           1# 4BG4, ('-/&* !0(21*%&8 a collection of eight of the stories he 
           had been working on over the last few years. The book, the ﬁrst he 
           had  released  since A  History  of  Eternity  ﬁve  years  earlier, immedi-
           ately cut a ri. into the Argentine literary world. The journal Sur, for 
           which he was a frequent contributor and whose board was stacked 
           with admirers, treated the publication as a major cultural event. Bioy 
           quickly published a review in which he touted Borges’s new style of 
           writing as having discovered “the literary possibilities of metaphys-
           ics.”27 His hopes high, Borges entered it into the National Awards for 
           Literature competition.28
             More conservative than the Sur writers, the selection committee 
           wasn’t sure what to make of the strange collection of stories. Were 
           they even stories? An essay about a French writer who copied some 
           chapters of Don Quixote; an investigation into a secret society that 
           had created a ﬁctional world. At least the story Borges had chosen 
           for the collection’s title, “The Garden of Forking Paths,” a spy story 
           set  in  a  prior  conﬂict  between  Germany  and  England,  had  some 
           recognizable  trappings  of  ﬁction.  Still,  one  identiﬁable  genre  out 
           of the entire set didn’t pass muster, and so the committee passed on 
           Borges, again. The judges preferred more familiar subjects.29
             The circle around Sur, many of whom were members of a group 
           called the Argentine Society of Writers, rallied around Borges and 
           responded by publishing a special issue of the magazine dedicated 
           to his work and hosting a dinner in his honor. In fact, the battle 
           lines were being drawn over the thinly hidden contours of a politi-
           cal and cultural divide that had started to emerge in Argentina in 
           the shadow of World War II. The literary establishment’s snubbing 
           of Borges came in the barely disguised language of anti-Semitism:  
           “exotic and decadent work” exhibiting “certain deviant tendencies 
           of contemporary English literature.”30 The selection committee was 
           packed with writers who tended toward the nationalist side of politics 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   152                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  153

           and who found Borges’s international, intellectual style elitist and 
           overly “cosmopolitan.”31 Borges, for his part, ever willing to engage 
           in tit- for- tat battles, built on public statements he had already made 
           against Hitler and in favor of the Allies and denounced the national-
           ists as Germanophiles and a potential ﬁ.h column in Argentina.32
              The conﬂict festered until the onset of the following year, when 
           Borges’s admonitions became true. In June 1943 a pro- Axis group 
           of  military  o<cers  staged  a  coup  and  were  quickly  supported  by 
           nationalist  factions,  who  stormed  the  streets  and  trashed  British- 
           owned businesses and homes. The junta that formed a few days later 
           made establishing nationalist themes in literature and culture a top 
           priority, publicly condemning those, like Borges, who exhibited too 
           little interest in properly Argentine themes.33
              In this political maelstrom Borges decided to double down on 
           his artistic choices and his fervent opposition to what he saw as liter-
           ature written in support of fascism. In 1944 he created a new group-
           ing of stories he had written since the publication of The Garden of 
           Forking  Paths,  calling  this  collection Artiﬁces.  Rather  than  publish 
           them alone, he reissued the former collection and put both out in a 
           single, two- part book under the simple title Fictions.
              Fictions  would  go  on  to  become  one  of  Borges’s  most  noted, 
           republished, and translated collections. It would play a large role 
           in earning him the ﬁrst International Publishers’ Prize almost two 
           decades later, awarded to an author “whose existing body of work 
           will, in the view of the jury, have a lasting inﬂuence on the develop-
           ment of modern literature.”34 Among its pages was one of the tales 
           from the ﬁrst group of stories that Borges had put out in 1941, a 
           story that picked up on the themes he outlined in the little essay 
           that he had written years earlier in the Miguel Cané library. This tale 
           would go on to be debated and imitated, illustrated by renowned 
           artists  and  pondered  by  philosophers  and  mathematicians  alike. 
           Almost entirely lacking in plot or character development, it became 
           a classic of existentialist and absurdist literature from its ﬁrst indel-
           ible words: “The universe (which others call the Library).”35


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   153                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           154             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           1# “$%& 21(-"-, '3 Babel,” Borges sketches a vision of hell in exqui-
           site architectural detail. A narrator’s voice is revealed to be that of “a 
           librarian,” one of many who have existed and will exist in the future, 
           who spend their lives roaming the hexagonal rooms of the Library.36 
           Four of each hexagon’s walls are lined with books, the other two 
           opening onto vestibules that in turn lead into the next set of hexa-
           gons. Running up and down each hexagonal room and each vesti-
           bule is a spiral staircase leading to identical rooms above and below. 
           On each of the rooms’ four walls are arranged ﬁve bookshelves; each 
           shelf contains thirty-two  books; each book “contains four hundred 
           ten  pages;  each  page  forty  lines;  each  line,  approximately  eighty 
           black letters.”37
             The books, we soon learn, contain combinations of twenty-ﬁve  
           orthographic symbols. These include twenty-two  letters along with 
           spaces,  commas,  and  periods.  Like  the  kabbalists  in  their Book  of 
           Creation, the librarians who wander the Library’s chambers learn 
           that all the diversity in the universe is the result of combinations of 
           these symbols. Somewhere in the Library is one book that contains 
           nothing but a’s; elsewhere, no one knows where, another lies whose 
           pages contain nothing but a’s with the sole exception of one solitary 
           b. And on and on it goes.
             Over the centuries the librarians have studied countless volumes 
           and have converged upon a set of theories about the nature of the 
           Library. According to the consensus, two basic principles govern the 
           collection: the Library contains every book of the set length that can 
           possibly be constructed out of the given orthographic symbols; and 
           no two of those books are identical.38
             That’s it. It seems so simple. And yet do we have any idea how 
           large such a collection would be? The great semiotician and novelist 
           Umberto Eco disregarded the question, calling it irrelevant to the 
           story’s meaning.39 Still, let’s go there. The mathematician William 
           Goldbloom Bloch did, and what he found out was nothing short of 
           astonishing.
             Using  combinatorics  and  scientiﬁc  notation,  Bloch  calculated 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   154                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  155

           the number of distinct books in Borges’s library as being 251,312,000, a 
           number somewhat larger than a one followed by 1,834,097 zeros.40 
           Since numbers in the abstract can fail to reach readers who aren’t 
           trained  mathematicians,  Bloch  goes  on  to  compare  the  size  the 
           Library would need to be to contain that number of books with the 
           size cosmologists estimate for our universe. Su<ce it to say, our cos-
           mos doesn’t fare well. Slightly overstating the current projections of 
           its size, we can estimate that our universe has enough space in it to 
           accommodate a mere 1084 books— if, that is, the universe consisted 
           of nothing but books stacked as tightly as possible. But if that were 
           the case, our known universe could ﬁt into Borges’s Library 101,834,013 
           times (that is not even counting the fact that the Library consists of 
           large amounts of space in addition to books, which in fact would 
           make it immeasurably larger). If we packed protons tightly into our 
           known  universe,  we  might  cram  in  about  10124  of  the  subatomic 
           particles; in other words, in comparison to the Library, our entire 
           universe is much, much, much smaller than a proton.41
              Despite the awe-inspiring,  truly unimaginable size of the Library, 
           the next most salient fact is that it is not inﬁnite. Since (echoing our 
           facile proclamations on the unicity of snowﬂakes) there are no two 
           identical books in the Library, this means that as vast as it is, there is 
           an upper limit on the Library’s size. And this fact in turn means that 
           somewhere, light- years upon light- years away, above or below, to the 
           le. or the right, the Library should come to an end. It should have 
           an upper ﬂoor, with no hexagons above; it should have a last cell, 
           with no opening in the wall.
              But  such  borders  are,  according  to  the  basic  architecture  that 
           Borges has outlined, impossible. Each and every cell is identical in 
           shape, size, and number of books. The Library is uniform, which 
           means that you can’t, even in theory, ﬁnd a cell whose upper or side 
           limits are closed, making them di7erent from all the others. Like 
           the medievals, like the ancients, Borges is forced to grapple with the 
           edge of a universe that is presumed to encompass all. Like the medi-
           evals, like the ancients, he solves it by curving space:


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   155                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           156             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             Idealists argue that the hexagonal rooms are the necessary shape 
             of absolute space, or at least our perception of space. They argue 
             that a triangular or pentagonal chamber is inconceivable. (Mys-
             tics claim that their ecstasies reveal to them a circular chamber 
             containing an enormous circular book with a continuous spine 
             that  goes  completely  around  the  walls.  But  their  testimony  is 
             suspect,  their  words  obscure.  That  cyclical  book  is  God.)  Let 
             it su<ce for the moment that I repeat the classic dictum: The 
             Library is a sphere whose exact center is any hexagon and whose cir-
             cumference is unattainable.42

             The “classic dictum” is one that has o.en been cited by mystics 
           and philosophers as a deﬁnition of God as a sphere whose center is 
           everywhere and circumference is nowhere. It is also an exact ana-
           logue of the architecture Dante invented for his cosmos, building 
           on theological and cosmological answers to the conundrums of the 
           location of the universe and God’s ability or inability to move it. But 
           modern mathematics has another name for it. A hypersphere.
             Like the vastness of Borges’s mathematics in the Library, a hyper-
           sphere, which is a four- dimensional object, isn’t really imaginable 
           for beings like us who inhabit three spatial dimensions. But we can 
           extrapolate from lower- dimensional objects to get a sense of it. To 
           begin with, imagine any sphere, say the surface of a basketball. Now 
           imagine being a microorganism whose life is conﬁned to that sur-
           face. Directions in your world would include le. and right, forward 
           and backward, but up and down—in  this case, inside and outside 
           the rubber surface of the ball— simply wouldn’t exist for you.43
             Now  imagine  that  you  have  studied  cosmology  and  trained 
           your telescopes on the far reaches of your space. As light reaches 
           you from farther and farther away, the sources of that light, while 
           at ﬁrst diverging from each other, at a certain point begin to con-
           verge. When you aim your telescope far enough into the distance, it 
           turns out that you are looking toward the very same point in space 
           (namely, the other side of the basketball) no matter what direction you 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   156                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  157

           turn your gaze.
              What  we  have  imagined  is  still  a  two- dimensional object  and 
           hence perfectly graspable in three dimensions. The only step that 
           remains  is  to  extrapolate  from  this  model  by  imagining  that  the 
           two- dimensional creature whose perspective you occupied is now 
           three- dimensional, while  maintaining  the  strange  fact  that  if  you 
           get your information from far enough away, it doesn’t matter which 
           direction you look when looking out, you are still looking at the 
           same point. In other words, exactly as the medievals did when they 
           looked up at the sky, you are now looking inward toward some cen-
           tral point, a point that, paradoxically, encompasses all of existence.
              The Library Borges constructed is hyper-spherical  in shape; when 
           the librarian dies, he tells us, “compassionate hands will throw me 
           over the railing; my tomb will be the unfathomable air, my body will 
           sink for ages, and will decay and dissolve in the wind engendered 
           by my fall, which shall be inﬁnite.”44 An enormous but ﬁnite collec-
           tion of books; an inﬁnite fall. The only solution is a hypersphere, 
           ﬁnite in size but boundless in shape. And yet an important di7er-
           ence remains between Borges’s vision and that of Dante. Crucially, 
           the certainty that anchors Dante’s cosmos is that all- encompassing 
           center,  this  heaven  that “has  no  other where  than  this:  the  mind 
           of God, in which are kindled both the love that turns it and the 
           force it rains.”45 For Borges, lost in the seemingly endless aisles of an 
           absurdist library of despair, the center is wherever one is, and that 
           circumference, that impossible, all- encompassing point and origin, 
           nowhere. Or, at least, unattainable.
              Unattainable, perhaps, but still a consummation devoutly to be 
           wished. And this was Borges’s brilliant riposte to Dante’s cosmos, 
           the rebellious response of a man denied love, denied redemption 
           at every turn, a “rueful and abandoned man” who, like Kant before 
           him, faced the challenge of a meaningless and lawless world, a uni-
           verse of ﬂeeting impressions tossed together by happenstance, and 
           refused,  against  tradition  and  temptation,  both  the  path  of  utter 
           despair and that of blind devotion.46


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   157                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           158             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             For just as the minimum coherence that permits a chaotic jum-
           ble of impressions to congeal into the ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life 
           requires a being whose existence transcends total absorption in that 
           sensory manifold, our awareness of the vast and apparently inﬁnite 
           span of existence in space and time imposes on that wild expanse an 
           order, a rigor, a necessary structure.
             We create that order, but we imagine it preceded us. Treading 
           water in the bad inﬁnity of space and time, we can see no end. We 
           are like the librarians who, searching for a ﬁnal vindication of their 
           existence, “squabbled in the narrow corridors, muttered dark impre-
           cations, strangled one another on the divine staircases, threw deceiv-
           ing volumes down ventilation sha.s, were themselves hurled to their 
           deaths by men of distant regions.”47 Superstitions rise and fall, like 
           that of the Book- Man: that somewhere in the Library’s uncharted 
           expanse there must be a book that explains it all, “the cipher and 
           perfect  compendium of  all  other  books,  and  some  librarian  must 
           have  examined  that  book;  this  librarian  is  analogous  to  a  god.”48 
           Desperate for this redemption, desperate that life be more than the 
           random purging of a vast combinator, Borges’s librarian prays, “Let 
           heaven exist, though my own place be in hell. Let me be tortured 
           and battered and annihilated, but let there be one instant, one crea-
           ture, wherein thy enormous Library may ﬁnd its justiﬁcation.”49
             Without such justiﬁcation, no individual exists, nothing is cre-
           ated, nothing new. “To speak is to commit tautologies,” Borges writes, 
           for absolutely nothing that one can say has not been said countless 
           times in countless volumes.50 And yet, and yet . . . Borges recognized 
           that  even  feeling  lost  requires  an  organizing  principle,  a  scintilla 
           of freedom, a modicum of salvation. Since those “who picture the 
           world as unlimited forget that the number of possible books is not,” 
           Borges ends by proposing a hope, one gestured to by Nietzsche’s 
           eternal return: an eternal traveler would, because there is a limited 
           number  of  ways  to  organize  a  limited  number  of  volumes,  even-
           tually ﬁnd the same volumes repeated in the same order, “which, 
           repeated, becomes order.”51 But Borges knew that such an order, on 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   158                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                    The Universe (Which Others Call the Library)  159

           its own, is not enough.
              Like Kant sparked to hope by Hume’s despair, Borges saw that 
           the very memory needed to see a recurrence as a recurrence would 
           of  necessity  be  an  alien  element.  The  order  thus  discovered,  that 
           underlying rigor, is one of chess masters, not angels. But it is a rigor 
           nonetheless. Like Dante’s cosmos, the universe that others call the 
           Library is contained by its center; unlike Dante’s, that center isn’t 
           God.  It  is,  instead,  the  very  observer  whose  absorption  into  the 
           whirling, bu7eting, random chance generator of temporal and spa-
           tial existence requires a minimum of abstraction, an iota of order, 
           an atom of rigor just to feel lost and absorbed in the ﬁrst place. It 
           is, indeed, that very observer for whom the conditions of possibil-
           ity of knowing anything at all also require that universe turn itself 
           inside out, become a hypersphere whose central point envelops all 
           existence.


           1# 4BJG, " *:"#$ twenty years a.er Borges published his Fictions 
           and more than half a millennium a.er Dante wrote his Divine Com-
           edy, two astronomers working out of a research facility in Holmdel, 
           New Jersey, noticed an annoying residue of static in the highly sen-
           sitive readings their radio telescopes were making of distant space. 
           They assumed it must be due to the pigeons that insisted on roost-
           ing up there and crapping all over the dish. So they climbed onto 
           the apparatus and carefully scoured it. To no avail. It turns out they 
           were listening not to pigeon droppings but to the microwave radia-
           tion le. over from the origin of time. But these traces of the big 
           bang had no speciﬁc origin. No matter what direction they trained 
           their instruments, the cosmic background radiation was identical. 
           Their discovery conﬁrmed that Dante was right. No matter where 
           we train our gaze on the starry skies above, we look inward toward 
           the very origin of space and time. Thus freeing our minds from our 
           senses, we ﬁnd that the universe is, indeed, turned inside out.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   159                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                      8

                                GRAVITAS


              # $%& *099&-  '3 1922, a young physics student took a train 
              from Munich to Leipzig to hear a great man speak. The speaker, 
          IAlbert Einstein, had by then ascended to the pinnacle of sci-
           entiﬁc  achievement  and  renown.  He  had  overturned  generations 
           of thinking about the nature of light; he had redeﬁned humanity’s 
           basic understanding of time and space; and he had explained how 
           gravity  works,  replacing  equations  that  had  withstood  the  test  of 
           two centuries with an even more accurate theory. It thus came as a 
           shock to a starstruck Werner Heisenberg when, upon entering the 
           lecture hall, he spied pamphlets being passed around denouncing 
           Einstein  as  a “Jew”  whose  perverse  theories  had  undermined  the 
           simplicity and elegance of classical physics.
             Heisenberg had come to Leipzig brimming with excitement and 
           committed to a notion of science as the perfect embodiment of the 
           pursuit of truth. The pamphlets he found there came from the pen of 
           one of Germany’s top scientists, the Nobel laureate Philipp Lenard, 
           whose anti- Semitic persecution helped ensure that Einstein’s own 
           Nobel would come years late and for reasons other than his relativ-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   160                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      161

           ity theory. Heisenberg was so distraught by this attack on the dean 
           of modern science that he le. the hall without even noticing that 
           the man lecturing that day was not Einstein, who had canceled his 
           trip out of anger at Lenard’s abuse. Returning to the cheap quarters 
           he had rented, Heisenberg saw they had been broken into and his 
           few meager possessions stolen. Eviscerated, the young man returned 
           to Munich that same night. The next day he sought out temporary 
           work as a woodcutter to earn the money he would need to replace 
           the items he had lost.1
              It would be another four years before Heisenberg would meet 
           Einstein. By then he had graduated from a neophyte to a core mem-
           ber  of  the  scientiﬁc  avant-garde,   revolutionizing  physics  with  his 
           bizarre new quantum mechanics. Einstein and his older colleague 
           Max Planck still ruled the physics world from their perch at their 
           institute  in  Berlin,  which  Heisenberg  called  the  chief “citadel  of 
           physics  in  Germany.”2  Keen  to  learn  more  about  the  uprisings  in 
           Copenhagen and Göttingen, the luminaries invited Heisenberg to 
           give a lecture on his work. A.er the presentation, Einstein invited 
           Heisenberg to his house, where he peppered him with friendly but 
           critical questions. The older man seemed particularly exercised by 
           Heisenberg’s nonchalance concerning what was actually going on 
           inside  the  atom  in  the  time  spans  separating  the  experimenter’s 
           observations.
              It didn’t really matter what was going on beyond the reach of 
           our  instruments,  Heisenberg  blithely  insisted;  it  only  mattered 
           what one could measure, because “a good theory must be based on 
           directly observable magnitudes.”3 Einstein shot back that the young 
           man  couldn’t  possibly  believe  that only  observable  magnitudes 
           should be part of a physical theory. This is when Heisenberg drew 
           his famous comparison to Einstein’s own work, pointing out that 
           the revolutionary insight that enabled his relativity theory occurred 
           when  Einstein  decided  to  disregard  what  everyone  thought  they 
           knew about space and time, that they were absolute backdrops inde-
           pendent of any observer’s speciﬁc attributes. Granting that he might 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   161                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           162             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           have used a similar kind of reasoning, Einstein nonetheless rebu7ed 
           the comparison.4
             As few and far between as their interactions were, the sparring 
           between Einstein and Heisenberg has become a kind of shorthand 
           for an extraordinary chasm that has challenged the advancement of 
           physics over the past century. Einstein’s theories of special and gen-
           eral relativity explain to a remarkable degree of accuracy the work-
           ings of the universe on the grandest of scales; they allow astronomers 
           to understand the movement of stars and galaxies, to probe into the 
           enigmatic depths of black holes, and to measure the age and rate of 
           expansion of the cosmos itself. Quantum mechanics, for its part, has 
           proven uncontested in its ability to probe the smallest constituents 
           of matter and, in its later developments, has been capable of pre-
           dicting with pinpoint precision the emergence of new fundamental 
           particles. And yet, despite such independent proof of their validity, 
           the two pillars of modern physics have also proven to be stubbornly 
           incompatible.5
             While  the  speciﬁcs  underlying  this  incompatibility  are  highly 
           complex,  the  overall  reason  lies  in  the  very  aspect  of  quantum 
           mechanics  that  Einstein  and  Schrödinger  found  so  distasteful, 
           namely,  its  discovery  that  at  subatomic  levels  reality  cedes  to  the 
           uncertainty principle; that, if you look closely enough at nature, the 
           smooth continuity of matter’s movement disappears and is replaced 
           by  violent  quantum  ﬂuctuations;  and  that  particles  like  electrons 
           can’t  be  said  to  follow  distinct  paths  unless  and  until  they  are 
           observed. In the ﬁnal form Einstein gave it in 1916, when he success-
           fully incorporated gravity, the space- time his theory described was a 
           continuum; its equations describe the movements of objects across 
           an admittedly complex and curved spatiotemporal fabric, but one 
           that is ultimately smooth. Its equations cannot, in the words of the 
           string theorist Brian Greene, “handle the roiling frenzy of quantum 
           foam.”6
             Despite  the  popular  narrative  ascribing  to  each  scientist  a 
           founding  role  in  this  dramatic  schism,  Heisenberg  believed  that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   162                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      163

           his discovery had a spirit similar to that of Einstein’s. He was not 
           alone. Einstein’s friend Philipp Frank also rebuked Einstein for his 
           resistance to what he took to calling the “new fashion” in physics 
           of refusing to ascribe reality to what cannot be measured or seen, 
           reminding him that “the fashion you speak of was invented by you 
           in 1905!” Einstein’s sardonic reply, that a “good joke should not be 
           repeated too o.en,” would join many others in a posterity replete 
           with his bons mots.7
              For  Heisenberg,  Einstein’s  prior  willingness  to  disregard  what 
           everyone knew about space and time in favor of what the data were 
           telling  him  was  the  furthest  thing  from  a  joke.  It  embodied  an 
           approach to science and knowledge that he would defend for the 
           rest of his career. It is also the best way for us to see how the realms 
           claimed by relativity and quantum physics are, despite their history 
           of conﬂict, profoundly related.


           (, $%& 2"$& #1#&$&&#$%  century  scientists  already  had  a  pretty 
           good measure of how fast light propagated in a vacuum. The puzzle 
           Einstein set to unravel in his extraordinary 1905 paper was how to 
           account for an apparent paradox. Strangely, light always clocked in 
           at the same speed— no matter how fast the measurer travels relative 
           to the light source and no matter who is doing the measuring.
              To be clear, this is not how measurements of speed usually work. 
           If you are moving on a train at 10 kilometers an hour and throw a 
           baseball ahead of you at 20 kilometers an hour, you will measure 
           the speed of the ball as 20 kilometers an hour, whereas your friend 
           standing by the side of the road as you ride by will measure its speed 
           as 30 kilometers an hour. Light behaves quite di7erently. If the crew 
           of a rocket heading toward Mars were moving at 30,000 kilometers 
           per second, or about 10 percent of the speed of light, and aimed a 
           light beam toward Mars, they would measure the speed of that beam 
           as 300,000 kilometers per second. Observers sitting on an asteroid 
           as they zipped by, however, would measure the same light beam as 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   163                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           164             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           moving not at 330,000 kilometers per second, but at light’s normal 
           clip of 300,000 kilometers per second.
             Two observers who measure the same velocity for a light beam 
           despite moving at vastly di7erent velocities themselves couldn’t both 
           be right. Or can they?
             By now we have learned to recognize situations in which two 
           watertight conclusions are at loggerheads with each other, in which 
           each statement must be true but both cannot be true. Kant called 
           these antinomies, and it turns out Einstein’s strategy for solving the 
           antinomy of light’s propagation was identical to Kant’s. Just as Kant 
           realized that resolving antinomies required removing the implicit 
           assumption of a God’s-eye perspective from how a particular prob-
           lem  had  been  presented  and  considered,  Einstein  now  saw  that 
           the problem lay in a fundamental assumption about the “neutral” 
           observers, principally that they have access to a universal, unchang-
           ing experience of time.
             Newton  had  assumed  that  time  was  absolute.  Einstein  now 
           realized  that  the  apparent  contradiction  between  expected  and 
           measured  velocities  emerged  from  this  incorrect  notion  of  time: 
           “Before the advent of the theory of relativity it had always tacitly 
           been assumed in physics that the statement of time had an absolute 
           signiﬁcance, i.e., that it is independent of the state of motion of the 
           body of reference . . . ; if we disregard this assumption, then the con-
           ﬂict between the law of the propagation of light in vacuo and the 
           principle of relativity . . . disappears.”8
             In  the  case  of  our  speedy  voyagers  to  Mars  and  their  neutral 
           observers, each measures the same velocity for the light beam despite 
           the vast di7erences between their respective velocities— because their 
           respective experience of time is di!erent. The observers on the asteroid 
           imagine that the travelers must be measuring the beam’s velocity 
           at  270,000  kilometers  per  second,  but  the  crew  on  the  spaceship 
           measure at 300,000 kilometers per second. Both measure the same 
           velocity because the clock used by the crew is ticking away more 
           slowly than the one used by the asteroid observers (their units for 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   164                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      165

           measuring distance are also shorter, but we can skip over that for 
           now), thus allowing the light beam’s velocity to remain exactly the 
           same for both.


           (, -&9';1#/ #&+$'#’* 0#1;&-*"2 clock from the set of assump-
           tions with which scientists approach the world, Einstein resolved a 
           fundamental antinomy and provided physics with a new and highly 
           accurate theory. But there was still something missing.
              In the mid-seventeenth  century Sir Isaac Newton worked out the 
           equations that would, with extraordinary accuracy, be used for more 
           than  two  hundred  years  to  predict  how  large  bodies  moving  in 
           space inﬂuence one another. Each body in the universe attracts every 
           other body in the universe with a force equal to the product of their 
           masses divided by the square of the distance separating them. It’s 
           as simple as that. What Newton le. untouched was the medium of 
           that attraction. As he put it, the idea of bodies acting on one another 
           across a vacuum without some medium connecting them “is to me 
           so great an absurdity that I beleive [sic] no man who has in philo-
           sophical  matters  any  competent  faculty  of  thinking  can  ever  fall 
           into it.” In fact, he refused to speculate what that medium might be, 
           leaving that mystery “to ye consideration of my readers.”9 Moreover, 
           Newton assumed the force of gravity acted instantaneously: thus, 
           if the earth were suddenly to disappear, the moon would instantly 
           alter its course, no longer under the sway of the earth’s gravitational 
           inﬂuence. But why? How would the moon know?
              Newton’s  perfectly  functioning  explanation  of  gravitational 
           e7ects, in other words, fell short as a theory. It le. gaping holes of 
           which Newton himself was fully aware. He illustrated another such 
           hole  with  a  particularly  vivid  thought  experiment.  If  you  hang  a 
           bucket half full of water from a string and then spin the bucket, 
           the water inside will eventually start to rotate along with the walls 
           of the bucket. As the speed of the rotation increases, the water will 
           rise at the edges of the bucket, in a demonstration of what is known 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   165                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           166             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           as centrifugal force. While this phenomenon is totally normal and 
           to be expected, as Newton thought about it, he realized that under 
           certain conditions it conﬂicted with Galileo’s principle of relativity, 
           which stated that the laws of physics apply equally to frames of ref-
           erence in uniform motion relative to one another. What this means 
           is that observers in one frame of reference, say, on board a moving 
           ship, can’t run any experiments that will privilege their own frame 
           of reference over that of another ship so long as both are moving 
           at constant rates. Neither can claim to be at rest while the other is 
           moving.
             At  ﬁrst  glance,  of  course,  this  is  not  the  case  for  the  bucket. 
           Because it moves in a circle, its motion is not uniform with respect 
           to a neutral observer. And the lack of uniformity shows itself via the 
           water climbing up the edges of the bucket. Even if we are walled o7 
           from the rest of the world, we know our bucket is spinning because 
           the water feels the e7ect of the centrifugal force. But how does it feel 
           it? Newton asked. What if the bucket ﬂoated in totally empty space, 
           with nothing around it to determine that it is spinning? Would it 
           still  feel  the  centrifugal  force?  If  so,  why?  Just  like  God  trying  to 
           move Aristotle’s cosmos without reference to a place in which to 
           move it, what would it mean to spin a bucket in empty space?
             Newton’s  presumptive  answer  was  that  the  bucket  could  only 
           know  if  it  were  spinning  or  not  if  the  space  in  which  it  existed, 
           like the time against which change is measured in the world, were a 
           universal and stationary backdrop. Space and time both functioned 
           as monumental and empty containers for anything that might pass 
           through them. Just like his clock, Newton’s model of universal, inﬁ-
           nite,  three- dimensional space  lasted  for  a  long  time. But  as  o.en 
           happens with science, resolving one problem popped open another. 
           In this case, by denying absolute time and deﬁnitively showing that 
           nothing could ever move faster than light, Einstein had also deci-
           mated Newton’s provisional explanation of gravity, because accord-
           ing to the same theory there could be no neutral backdrop of space 
           that can automatically and instantly tell the bucket if it is spinning 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   166                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      167

           or not. If the bucket feels something about its motion, this feeling 
           must be conveyed from somewhere, and anything that is conveyed 
           takes time. In short, having given up both space and time as absolute, 
           rigid backdrops, Einstein would now need not a special theory, lim-
           ited to cases of uniform motion, but a general one, one that would 
           show how the laws of physics were interchangeable in all frames of 
           reference, whether moving uniformly or not.
              It was while struggling with this enormous problem that Ein-
           stein had what he would later call his happiest thought: “I was sit-
           ting  in  a  chair  in  the  patent  o<ce  at  Bern  when  all  of  a  sudden 
           a thought occurred to me. If a person falls freely, he will not feel 
           his own weight.”10 What would become known as the equivalence 
           principle of general relativity emerged from a combination of New-
           ton’s two open questions: What is gravity? And how does the bucket 
           know it’s spinning? As Einstein would later formulate it, a passenger 
           in an enclosed chest being pulled along in empty space at a con-
           stant acceleration by some being would have no way to distinguish 
           that feeling of acceleration from the feeling of being pulled by the 
           earth’s gravity.
              As happy as the thought might have been, it would take another 
           eight years to bring it to fruition. For one, Einstein had to grapple 
           with a kind of mathematics that was new to him. While in his spe-
           cial relativity theory Einstein had already announced that space and 
           time could no longer be considered independent of each other but 
           would henceforth be aspects of a single overarching space- time, he 
           now  had  to  grapple  with  how  to  describe  that  four- dimensional 
           space- time mathematically. He did so by turning to the geometry 
           developed in the nineteenth century by the German mathematician 
           Georg Friedrich Bernhard Riemann, which permitted geometrical 
           calculations  in  multidimensional,  curved  spaces.  This  new  math 
           didn’t come easily to Einstein. David Hilbert, a friend and competi-
           tor in the quest for a general theory of relativity, would later claim 
           (somewhat  hyperbolically)  that “every  boy  in  the  streets  of  Göt-
           tingen  understands  more  about  four- dimensional geometry  than 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   167                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           168             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Einstein,”  before  graciously  acknowledging  that, “in  spite  of  that, 
           Einstein did the work.”11
             With the math he borrowed from Riemann, Einstein was now 
           able to propose experimental proofs for his contention that both 
           gravity and acceleration were describable as the curving or warping 
           of the four- dimensional space- time continuum. Speciﬁcally, he said 
           that the light from a distant star would bend slightly as it passed 
           around our sun. Using his theory, he worked out the angle of that 
           curve and predicted that if astronomers could capture starlight as it 
           came around our sun, the stars emitting that light “ought to appear 
           to be displaced outwards from the sun by . . . 1.7 seconds of arc.”12
             Because of the brightness of the sun, such starlight is impossible 
           to see— except during a full solar eclipse. So the world had to wait. A 
           ﬁrst proposed expedition to Ukraine in 1917 stalled under the pres-
           sure of the hostilities of World War I. Thus it was only in 1919, more 
           than three years a.er Einstein announced his theory, that Arthur 
           Eddington led an expedition to the Portuguese island of Príncipe 
           o7 the coast of Africa to perform his observations of a total eclipse. 
           The  average  of  the  images  taken  there  and  by  a  sister  expedition 
           o7  the  coast  of  Brazil  proved  Einstein  right.  Back  in  Berlin,  Ein-
           stein feigned nonchalance. “I knew the theory is correct,” he told Ilse 
           Schneider, the graduate student with whom he was meeting.13 But 
           what if the experiment had proved him wrong, she wanted to know. 
           “Then I would have been sorry for the dear Lord,” Einstein replied.14


           +1$% *!&:1"2 -&2"$1;1$,, &1#*$&1# set out to explain a contradic-
           tion  that  had  been  apparent  to  scientists  since  experiments  that 
           measured the speed of light in the late nineteenth century. A speed-
           ing traveler and a neutral observer will clock the same velocity for 
           a light beam ﬁred by the traveler, even though the neutral observer 
           should be seeing the sum of the two velocities. So where did that 
           extra velocity go? The brilliance of Einstein’s insight was to realize 
           that it hadn’t gone anywhere at all. It was only our misunderstand-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   168                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      169

           ing of the nature of time that made it seem as though there were 
           a discrepancy. To get rid of the error, we must stop thinking about 
           time as something in which we observe events and instead think of 
           it as an aspect of how we observe those events that itself changes 
           with our velocity relative to other observers.
              With general relativity he had now made a similar move. New-
           ton  believed  his  bucket  experiment  pointed  to  the  existence  of 
           absolute space. Einstein’s new theory replaced that immobile and 
           universal container with what he would call the gravitational ﬁeld: 
           the universally di7used gravitational inﬂuence of all bodies in the 
           universe on all other bodies, which in turn creates the inertia that all 
           objects in non- uniform motion feel. As he put it, “According to my 
           theory, inertia is simply an interaction between masses, not an e7ect 
           in which ‘space’ itself is involved, separate from the observed mass.”15 
           The water climbs the side of Newton’s bucket when it spins because 
           of the inertia imparted on it by the gravitational pulls of the rest of 
           the objects in the universe. Without such objects, it makes no sense 
           to say the bucket spins. Our inability to understand how gravity and 
           acceleration were both expressions of the curvature of space- time 
           resulted from thinking that space was an empty, inﬁnitely extended, 
           rigid  backdrop  in  which  we  perceive  events  and  movements,  as 
           opposed  to  being  an  aspect  of  how  we  measure  and  relate  those 
           events and movements.
              Taken together, special and general relativity salvaged a picture 
           of the physical world in which the same laws applied in the same 
           ways no matter the situation of the one doing the observing, but at 
           the cost of forever demolishing the idea of a privileged, neutral spot 
           from which conﬂicting measurements— for instance, the length of 
           an object or the time of an event— could be adjudicated.16 At the 
           core of this new understanding of reality lay a profound revision 
           of the very notion of an observation. Observations, per Einstein, are 
           nothing other than coincidences between measuring instruments, 
           “the hands of a clock and points on the clock dial,” and the events 
           they are measuring.17


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   169                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           170             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             If we understand time not as a universal ﬂow in which things 
           happen but as one of the minimal conditions for observing things 
           happening in the ﬁrst place, we can see how time and space must be 
           profoundly related. The classic line about time keeping everything 
           from happening at once, while ﬂippant, does clarify the strong link 
           between time and observation. That events precede and follow on 
           one another is a fundamental condition of their observability. For 
           a human observer, at least, everything happening at once would be 
           nothing short of an obscene mess.
             But marking events as before and a.er also involves an aspect of 
           spatial experience. Any clock I can imagine translates moments of 
           time into something minimally spatial—the  movement of a pen-
           dulum,  a  distinguishable  alteration  of  a  substance, “coincidences 
           between the hands of a clock and points on the clock dial.” Time 
           cannot exist on its own but must partake in space. And exactly the 
           same is true of space. The minimal condition for di7erentiating a 
           here from a there—the  dog of three fourteen seen in proﬁle from 
           the dog of three ﬁ.een seen frontally— is the ability to compare the 
           two markers for the time it takes an observer to span their distance 
           and connect them. Just as clearly as time cannot exist without space, 
           so space cannot exist without time.
             The fact that time and space are observer dependent and inex-
           tricably connected also explains why there is a cosmic speed limit 
           and how it works. Since the three dimensions of space are part of a 
           larger four- dimensional space- time fabric, motion must always be 
           shared among the four dimensions, and any measurement of time, 
           being spatial, will be a7ected by observers’ movements, as will any 
           measurement of space, being temporal.
             To better  picture  this,  imagine  a  golf  cart  puttering  along  the 
           right side of a ﬁeld whose length represents time and whose width 
           represents space. Let’s say the fastest it can move overall is twenty- 
           ﬁve kilometers an hour. Now, as long as it remains on the right side-
           line (that is, motionless in space), it can move forward on the ﬁeld 
           at a steady pace—which  is to say, its clock ticks away at a normal 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   170                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      171

           pace. But there’s a rub. Since space and time are interrelated mea-
           surements and the cart’s total velocity on the ﬁeld in any direction 
           cannot surpass twenty- ﬁve kilometers an hour, if the cart veers to the 
           le. toward the other sideline (that is, starts moving in space), what-
           ever velocity applied in that direction must detract from its progress 
           toward the goal line, and the clock measuring its progress in time 
           slows down accordingly. Indeed, if its driver wants to get from the 
           right side of the ﬁeld to the le. as quickly as possible, the cart makes 
           no progress down the length of the ﬁeld at all— which is to say, its 
           clock  stops  ticking  so  that  it  can  turn  all  its  velocity  into  spatial 
           motion. Like a photon, the cart can traverse space at full speed, but 
           only at the cost of coming to a complete stop in time.18
              While Einstein abolished the idea of a privileged place in space 
           from which to measure the movement of the rest of the cosmos, 
           and a privileged standard against which to measure the ticking of 
           time, he did ﬁnd something absolute and constant: namely, that ulti-
           mate limit of observable change at the fulcrum of space and time, 
           a ﬁxed upper limit to how much space an entity can be observed 
           to have crossed in a set amount of time. The velocity of light in a 
           vacuum. Not twenty- ﬁve kilometers an hour, of course. But help-
           fully (for our experience of reality) much, much faster. This upper 
           limit doesn’t work like a legal speed limit, though. In the case of 
           a  speed  limit, you could  drive  eighty  kilometers  an  hour  on  your 
           ﬁ.y- kilometer- an- hour- zoned  local  side  street;  not  only  would  it 
           be unsafe, however, but you could also be pulled over and issued 
           an expensive ticket. In the case of the laws of physics, in contrast, 
           as you push your ride up to the cosmic speed limit, the clock you 
           use to measure time itself slows down relative to other observers. 
           The closer you get to that limit, the more it slows down, until the 
           clock you are carrying with you ceases to tick from the perspective 
           of those not traveling with you. To be sure, you aren’t noticing this 
           slowing  down. All  you  can  observe  from  your  perspective  is  that 
           your journey through space seemed instantaneous. If you are travel-
           ing at the cosmic speed limit, your clock doesn’t tick and you arrive 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   171                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           172             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           at the same time you le., even if those you le. behind have aged 
           considerably in the time you were gone.
             Of course, in our cosmos we can only imagine approaching that 
           limit. Only photons and other massless electromagnetic radiation 
           travel at light speed, and they, needless to say, don’t experience any-
           thing. Still, from the perspective of a photon (that is, no perspective 
           at all), time doesn’t pass. For a photon that was emitted shortly a.er 
           the origin of the universe that now happens to arrive through my 
           o<ce window, more than thirteen billion years have gone by in a 
           ﬂash. If time is what keeps everything from happening at once, those 
           things can happen only because they have pulled back from a speed 
           limit at which nothing happens at all.19
             When we understand space-time  not as an empty container in 
           which all existence takes place but as an index for an observer to 
           measure  the  interaction  between  two  entities  or  events,  intrinsic 
           and necessary limits emerge: on the one hand, a lower limit on how 
           small and how close together those events or entities can be before 
           ceasing to be separate entities; and on the other hand, an upper limit 
           on how far apart and how fast they are moving apart for a relation to 
           exist at all. Indeed, we can quickly grasp the necessity of these limits 
           by trying (and failing) to imagine the opposite, a universe without 
           such limits on observation, a universe as experienced by the gods of 
           very small and very large things. In such a universe “viewed” from 
           such  a  vantage, nothing  at  all  happens  because  everything, every-
           where, is perceived at once. And no movement or change can hap-
           pen because any given thing can only ever be identical to what it is 
           here and now.
             And it turns out that these limits—be  they the upper limit on 
           how much space can be traversed in a set time or how much time 
           can  be  measured  as  elapsing  by  a  timepiece  moving  in  space,  or 
           the lower limit on how small or short the observation of a sliver of 
           space- time can be— are subject to the very same irresolvable para-
           doxes that Kant discovered with his antinomies. Which is what Ein-
           stein found out when, in 1917, he tried to use his new theory to take 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   172                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      173

           measure of the cosmos as a whole.


           '# #';&9(&- G,  4B4@, &1#*$&1# arrived at the grand hall of the 
           Prussian State Library to give the ﬁrst of four previously scheduled 
           lectures to the Prussian Academy of Science. Few knew that he had 
           been racing down to the wire to ﬁnish his calculations, and indeed 
           would continue to work on them throughout the month leading 
           to his climactic delivery of the ﬁeld equations of gravity on Novem-
           ber 25. The results were nothing short of revolutionary. As his biog-
           rapher Walter Isaacson has written, “The general theory of relativity 
           was not merely the interpretation of some experimental data or the 
           discovery of a more accurate set of laws. It was a whole new way of 
           regarding reality.”20 Max Born would later dub it “the greatest feat of 
           human thinking about nature” and “the most amazing combination 
           of  philosophical  penetration,  physical  intuition,  and  mathemati-
           cal skill.”21 Unsurprisingly, such a usurpation of the laws of physics 
           would have profound ramiﬁcations for the study of the cosmos as 
           a whole. In 1916, a.er brieﬂy basking in the success of his grueling 
           e7orts, Einstein turned his attention to this most fundamental of all 
           questions.
              Newton had believed that the universe must be akin to a ﬁnite 
           island of matter ﬂoating in an inﬁnite void of space. That the island 
           in question must be ﬁnite he deduced from the nature of gravity, 
           for an inﬁnite amount of matter in the universe would generate an 
           inﬁnite gravitational force at the surface of every sphere located in it, 
           which is impossible. Einstein quickly saw that his theories of gravi-
           tation and light led to radically di7erent conclusions.
              To begin with, one of the outcomes of his theory of special rela-
           tivity had been the equivalence of mass and energy (canonized in 
           the  most  famous  equation  in  history, E  = mc2).  According  to  this 
           understanding, any ﬁnite island of mass in an inﬁnite sea of empty 
           space would radiate energy, and hence lose mass over time, leaving it 
           “to become gradually but systematically impoverished.”22 Moreover, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   173                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           174             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           it conﬂicted with general relativity as well. Newton had interpreted 
           his bucket experiment as showing that objects must know where 
           they are in absolute space. As we saw before, in Einstein’s theory the 
           inertial mass of objects in space depended on the di7usion through-
           out  the  universe  of  a  gravitational  ﬁeld  that  could  be  expressed 
           mathematically in the form of a curved space- time continuum. But 
           a ﬁnite amount of stu7 spread out in an inﬁnite expanse of space 
           would e7ectively produce no such ﬁeld, and hence we’d be back to 
           Newton’s bucket not knowing if it were spinning.23
             But  solving  this  problem  by  making  space  itself  ﬁnite  raised 
           the  age- old problem  of  what  it  could  possibly  mean  for  an  all- 
           encompassing cosmos to have boundaries. If there are boundaries, 
           what lies outside them? Moreover, the mere idea of a boundary to 
           space completely violated the theory of relativity, since the assump-
           tion  of  speciﬁc  boundaries  to  space  itself  imposes  an  absolute 
           “where” from which any measurements or observations would have 
           priority, thus restoring the very privileged positions of measurement 
           that relativity had managed to remove in favor of the universal appli-
           cation of the laws of physics.
             Faced yet again with an antinomy where both options seemed 
           at once absolutely necessary and utterly impossible, Einstein used 
           the  very  curvature  of  space- time that  his  theory  had  found  to  be 
           real to propose a radical solution. He knew his solution was likely 
           to elicit disbelief, and in fact wrote to his friend Paul Ehrenfest that 
           he was tentative about sharing it because it would expose him “to 
           the danger of being conﬁned to a madhouse.”24 His radical solution 
           was to propose a shape for the cosmos that was both ﬁnite and with-
           out boundaries, thus resolving the issue of where exactly the cosmos 
           was supposed to be ﬂoating around and why its contents didn’t just 
           spread out into a further inﬁnite emptiness around it: “The curva-
           ture of space is variable in time and place, according to the distribu-
           tion of matter, but we may roughly approximate to it by means of a 
           spherical space.”25
             By  spherical  Einstein  speciﬁcally  meant  a  3-sphere,   the  space 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   174                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      175

           “discovered by Riemann” that we have already seen both in Dante’s 
           cosmos and in Borges’sLibrary. Like those spaces, the sphere of this 
           universe  has  no  outer  boundaries.  As  Einstein  wrote,  for  anyone 
           in such a cosmos moving out from a central point, “the circumfer-
           ence of a circle ﬁrst increases with the radius until the ‘circumfer-
           ence of the universe’ is reached, and that it thenceforward gradually 
           decreases to zero for still further increasing values of the radius.”26 
           Like Dante’s cosmos, if you look outward from where you are, your 
           line  of  sight  eventually  reaches  a  point  where  you  start  to  look 
           inward toward a central point. Like Dante’s cosmos, its laws are the 
           same everywhere; there is no place Dante could have stepped onto 
           the primum mobile that would have made a di7erence to his route. 
           Like in Borges’s Library, there is no hexagonal cell that is any di7er-
           ent from any other.
              And yet Einstein’s numbers didn’t quite add up. According to 
           his calculations, the universe as a whole must be changing in time, 
           either shrinking or expanding. Unwilling to accept his own conclu-
           sions, Einstein fudged the numbers by inserting what he called a 
           cosmological  constant, a  term  he  deemed “necessary  only  for  the 
           purpose  of  making  possible  a  quasi- static distribution  of  matter”; 
           in other words, the added number stabilized his calculations and 
           allowed the universe to remain at a constant size. But remain that 
           size the universe would not.
              A few years a.er Einstein proposed his cosmological model, the 
           Russian meteorologist Alexander Friedmann used the equations of 
           general relativity to propose that the universe was in fact expanding. 
           A decade later the astronomer Edwin Hubble performed observa-
           tions of distant galaxies that proved this to be the case.27 Einstein 
           grudgingly accepted these ﬁndings and rued his addition of the cos-
           mological constant as being his worst blunder ever. (Years later a 
           new force pushing the expansion of the universe ever faster would 
           be discovered, one that would be remarkably close in value to Ein-
           stein’s blunder.)
              Since Einstein’s 3- sphere extends in four- dimensional space- time, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   175                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           176             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           it makes no sense to think of it exclusively in spatial terms. Rather, 
           we need to take into account that information about one part of 
           space  always  takes  time  to  arrive  at  any  other  part  of  space.  This 
           means that as we aim our telescopes out into the night sky, we are 
           not looking out, “like one looking out from the saloon entrance on 
           to the dark Atlantic or from the lighted porch upon dark and lonely 
           moors,” but looking in. We are looking inward toward the origin of 
           a universe that, as Augustine reminded us, began not in time but 
           with time. The boundaries of the cosmos cannot be located in space 
           and time; rather, its limits are intrinsic to space and time themselves.
             This is what the astronomers Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson 
           conﬁrmed when they cleaned their radio telescopes of the pigeon 
           droppings  that  had  accumulated  there  in  a  futile  attempt  to  get 
           rid of the residue of static that was marring their readings of the 
           distant  cosmos.  Their  failure  led  them  to  deduce  that  they  were 
           detecting  the  cosmic  microwave  background  radiation,  the  traces 
           le. over from the almost inﬁnite density and temperatures of the 
           earliest moments of the universe’s existence. Like Dante’s pilgrim, 
           who, stepping onto the primum mobile, exclaimed its “nearest and 
           most exalted parts are all so uniform, I cannot tell which Beatrice 
           selected as my place,” so uniform is the distribution of this radiation 
           we can aim our telescopes in any direction we want and we will 
           get the same readings.28 Indeed, just like Dante’s cosmos, a universe 
           that expands in space- time must be contained by its own center: a 
           point at the origin of space and time that envelops and enables all 
           of existence. And just like in Borges’s Library, where we are at any 
           time determines that point. For this four- dimensional architecture 
           implies an observer in the here and now, an observer who looks out-
           ward in space and simultaneously inward toward a singularity. An 
           origin not in time but of time; not in space, but of space.
             This architecture derives from the very principle that Einstein’s 
           relativity  theories  salvaged,  the  principle  that  there  could  be  no 
           privileged place in the universe from which to adjudicate di7erent 
           measurements. That no motion whatsoever, even that of the water 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   176                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      177

           in Newton’s bucket, is motion in an absolute sense, but is always 
           motion in respect to some other point of reference. That the uni-
           verse is not located anywhere, but rather has no other where than 
           here— not in the mind of God, but in the very minimum condi-
           tions that permit anything to be observed in the ﬁrst place. For this 
           extraordinary truth— that when gazing out into space, we are also 
           gazing in toward the origin of all space and time—is  not merely an 
           interesting quirk of cosmology. It is what enables there to be cosmos 
           in the ﬁrst place.


           %&1*&#(&-/’* 1#;1$"$1'# $' *!&") in Berlin in the spring of 1926 
           would have been daunting for anyone. Not only was the University 
           of Berlin the citadel of physics, home to such luminaries as Einstein 
           and Planck, but its physics colloquium was religiously attended by 
           the  entire  faculty. Now  the  twenty-four-  year- old research  assistant 
           had stood in front of this august assembly and explained why the 
           fundamental  assumptions  of  their  worldview  were  wrong.  In  his 
           typically understated way, Heisenberg would later recount that his 
           “unconventional theory” managed to “arouse Einstein’s interest.”29
              Back at Einstein’s house a.er their walk from the institute, engag-
           ing in the requisite small talk along the way, Einstein launched into 
           why supporting a theory only on observations is not enough. We 
           are never in the presence of raw data, unadorned by theory, he told 
           Heisenberg;  rather, “it  is  the  theory  which  decides  what  we  can 
           observe.”30  Where  Heisenberg  had  drawn  an  analogy  between  his 
           own discovery and what Einstein had done with Newton’s concept 
           of time, Einstein now drew a sharp distinction. With relativity he 
           had redeﬁned what counted as an observation. Two observers could 
           no longer simply look at an event and agree that it had occurred at a 
           speciﬁc time; instead, they would each synchronize their respective 
           observations with a clock, and the time of the observed event would 
           depend on the relative motion of the clocks. The “old descriptive 
           language” for time thus needed replacing with a new theory.31


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   177                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           178             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             For  quantum  mechanics,  the  electron  followed  a  path  in  the 
           cloud chamber but appeared not to follow one inside the atom. In 
           Einstein’s view, by simply denying the continuity of its movement 
           when in the atom, Heisenberg was setting himself up for failure, 
           “moving  on  very  thin  ice,” he  told  him, because  he  relied  on  the 
           same  old  descriptive  language.32  Without  a  new  theory  to  decide 
           what to observe, Heisenberg would be stuck with observations that 
           didn’t make sense, because they didn’t explain the reality of what 
           happened between those observations.
             The conversation with Einstein continued to haunt Heisenberg 
           long a.er his visit to Berlin. Indeed, it would lurk in the recesses of 
           his consciousness for almost a year before surfacing again during his 
           stay at the institute in Copenhagen. There, ﬁnally relieved of Bohr’s 
           pestering presence by his decision to go skiing, Heisenberg’s mind 
           returned to the path of the electron in a cloud chamber, its trajec-
           tory clearly mapped for all to see. At the same time, his own mathe-
           matical framework proving the discontinuity of electrons inside the 
           atom didn’t lie. The contradiction appeared impossible to resolve.
             And then, late one evening, he thought again of his conversation 
           with Einstein.33 Unable to sleep, Heisenberg pursued this thought 
           as he walked out into the frigid night for a walk in Faelled Park. 
           Einstein had pointed to the contradiction between his theory, which 
           allowed for no path within atoms, and the clearly observable paths 
           within cloud chambers. When Einstein said that the theory decides 
           what  we  observe,  he  clearly  meant  that  Heisenberg’s  math  was 
           clouding his observations. As he had said that day, “If your theory 
           is right, you will have to tell me sooner or later what the atom does 
           when it passes from one stationary state to the next.”34 He meant, in 
           other words, that in reality the electron always moved as it does in 
           the cloud chamber, even if Heisenberg’s theory told him it didn’t. In 
           the icy dark of his walk through the park, Heisenberg now realized 
           that  Einstein  was  right  about  the  role  theory  played  in  directing 
           his observations but he was wrong about which theory and which 
           observations it was directing.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   178                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      179

              When scientists thought they observed a clear path in the cloud 
           chamber,  perhaps  their  theory  told  them  what  to  see  there.  Per-
           haps they didn’t see a path at all, but rather “a series of discrete and 
           ill- deﬁned spots through which an electron had passed.” A.er all, 
           the water droplets that formed the path in the chamber were far 
           larger  than  the  electron.  Heisenberg  rushed  back  to  the  institute 
           and quickly scratched out a series of calculations that showed with-
           out a doubt that merely approximate values for an electron’s place 
           and velocity could easily account for the perceived path in a cloud 
           chamber. Those calculations also put a lower limit on how exact the 
           observation of either the position or the velocity could be. He had 
           discovered the uncertainty principle.35
              The theory guides the observation: this is a statement that might 
           have been made by Kant. Every impression is informed; every intu-
           ition has a form, a condition of possibility of its becoming an obser-
           vation in the ﬁrst place. Einstein reminded Heisenberg of this insight 
           to dissuade him from undermining the basic sense of reality under-
           lying our observations. For Einstein theory meant a “knowledge of 
           natural laws” needed for reality to function in the ﬁrst place.36 When 
           Heisenberg talked about observations without regard to theory, he 
           was on thin ice because he was “suddenly speaking of what we know 
           about nature and no longer about what nature really does.”37 He was 
           failing to use his knowledge of natural laws to translate our knowl-
           edge of nature into the reality of nature.
              Heisenberg took the lesson di7erently. What he realized is that 
           some theory always accounts for our observations, and that precisely 
           for this reason we are always limited to speaking of what we know 
           about nature and not about what nature does in itself. We see the 
           path of the electron in the cloud chamber because our theory tells 
           us that particles travel continuously through space and time. But 
           that continuity could also not be part of the electron’s reality but 
           rather be part of ours, because— like Funes recognizing himself in 
           the mirror—the  minimum requirement of any observation at all is 
           that the observer span those space-time  moments and create that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   179                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           180             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           continuity. This was what had led them astray. The observers and 
           their theory, their way of seeing the world, the necessary forms of 
           their intuition, sit at the heart of any observation, and there is no way 
           to remove them from that place. The best we can do is account for 
           their inﬂuence and understand that, when we push our observations 
           to the limits of all possible experience, retaining the assumptions 
           proper to our experience in space and time will lead us astray. This 
           is precisely what cosmologists discovered when they turned their 
           attention to the edge of the universe and to the primal moment of 
           creation itself.


           :'*9'2'/,  8&"2* +1$%  $%& largest  of  questions:  the  size  and 
           shape of the universe; its history over vast periods of time. Quantum 
           mechanics, in contrast, confronts the unimaginably tiny and its eva-
           nescence in inﬁnitesimal slivers of time. As such, the paradoxes of 
           the quantum world, which don’t a7ect our real- world experiences 
           of planes and baseballs, would seem utterly trivial next to the incon-
           ceivable expanses of space and time.
             The discovery that the universe is expanding changed all that. For 
           if we trace an expanding universe back in time, we inevitably come 
           to a moment when the unimaginably large becomes, well, imagin-
           able. And before that, rather small. And before that, unimaginably 
           small. And all of a sudden we face the prospect that the discontinu-
           ous and probabilistic nature of the subatomic world must have had 
           an enormous e7ect on our universe at the very ﬁrst microseconds 
           of its existence. Moreover, if we accept that particles have no single 
           path until they are observed, or to put it another way, the path of 
           particles is a quality of the observations we make of them and not of 
           the particles themselves, we are stuck with the unsettling possibility 
           that the same holds true for the universe.
             The physicist John Wheeler proposed a thought experiment that 
           would expand the apparatus involved in the two- slit experiment to 
           cosmic scales. Light emitted from a powerful source like a quasar 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   180                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      181

           billions of light- years away can pass around a source of gravity like a 
           galaxy and be refocused by the time it arrives at earth, the very pro-
           cess predicted by Einstein and conﬁrmed by Eddington that we now 
           call gravitational lensing. In theory, each side of the galaxy acts like a 
           slit in the experiment. Were we able to set up a vast array of detectors 
           around earth, we ought to be able to detect an interference pattern 
           from  the  quasar’s  emissions.  Furthermore,  if  we  could  position  a 
           device on the light’s pathway toward earth to detect which path the 
           photons had taken, the pattern should disappear— even though the 
           “choice” of which side of the galaxy the photon was taking would 
           have been made eons earlier.38
              Indeed,  photons  traversing  the  expanse  of  space- time  must 
           attend to the same rules that govern the behavior of photons pass-
           ing through the slits in a tiny experimental device. Depending on 
           one’s interpretation of quantum mechanics, this can mean that our 
           present- day observation determines the past trajectory; or that the 
           photon has no path until it has been measured; or that the photon 
           takes all possible paths until some measurement is performed that 
           limits  or  removes  some  options;  or  that  each  measurement  e7ec-
           tively splits the current universe into two, one for each “choice” the 
           photon is forced to make. As Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodi-
           now have argued, like the experimenter in a quantum experiment, 
           our observations of the present state of the universe must determine 
           its history.39
              When we take the lessons we’ve learned from quantum mechan-
           ics and apply them to the universe as governed by Einstein’s theory 
           of relativity, an extraordinary thing happens. To begin with, as Ein-
           stein ﬁrst resisted but eventually accepted, the universe’s expansion 
           is predicted by general relativity, but by the same laws the theory also 
           predicts that moving backward in time, we must come to a moment 
           when it was an inﬁnitesimal point of inﬁnite density and tempera-
           ture,40 a point much like that described by Dante, that sends forth 
           “so acute / a light, that anyone who faced the force / with which it 
           blazed would have to shut his eyes, / and any star that, seen from 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   181                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           182             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           earth, would seem / to be the smallest, set beside that point, as star 
           conjoined with star, would seem a moon.”41 And like this central 
           point in Dante’s cosmos, the singularity required by general relativ-
           ity isn’t located somewhere in space and time; rather, it has no other 
           where because, as present- day cosmologists put it (echoing Augus-
           tine, whether consciously or not), the universe began not in space 
           and time but with space and time, and thus asking what came before 
           it is a meaningless question.42 Like Dante’s center, the inﬁnitesimal 
           point at the origin of space and time envelops all of creation; it is the 
           horizon that we gaze out upon, only to realize we have been gazing 
           inward all along.
             Not only are we forced to reckon with the paradox of an edge 
           to space and time when we attempt to conceive of the cosmos as 
           a whole, but the fact that the singularity combines the conditions 
           of inﬁnite heat and density in an inﬁnitesimally small space means 
           that relativity no longer escapes the logic of the quantum world. As 
           we have learned by now, the inescapable law of the macrocosm is 
           the maximum amount of space that can be traversed by information 
           relative to an observer in a given amount of time. Likewise, the law 
           of the microcosm is nothing other than Heisenberg’s uncertainty 
           principle, which states that for an observer to reduce the uncertainty 
           of the position of a particle to zero, its momentum becomes inﬁ-
           nitely unknown, and vice versa, and for an observer to reduce the 
           uncertainty of the time of an event to zero, its energy becomes inﬁ-
           nitely unknown. Since conceiving of the origin of the universe by 
           deﬁnition means focusing on a moment when time was nothing, 
           uncertainty requires that the energy at that moment be literally any-
           thing. Uncertainty awaits us at the dawn of creation.43


           $%& -&*02$* '3 $%& two- slit experiment  seem  paradoxical.  How 
           does merely observing a particle at one point cause the interference 
           pattern elsewhere to disappear? The beauty of the Wheeler thought 
           experiment is how it reveals that the two observations, the one at the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   182                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      183

           slit (or galaxy) and the other at the screen (or array of detectors), are 
           separate observations, the results of which can only ever be commu-
           nicated at the speed of light— a fact obscured by the small size and 
           easy communicability of observations in a laboratory. The weirdness 
           that the two- slit experiment seems to showcase stems from believ-
           ing that the observers are the same and that their observations are 
           the same, but they are not. Just as with relativity, where observers in 
           di7erent frames of reference have di7erent readings for what “now” 
           means,  these  observers  must  have  di7erent  descriptions  of  reality 
           because their experiments measure the relations of points in space 
           and time that are speciﬁc to the conditions of each measurement.
              Like  Achilles  failing  to  overtake  the  tortoise,  or  the  watched 
           quantum  pot  failing  to  boil,  the  results  seem  paradoxical  only 
           because we project our expectation about reality— that it is single, 
           consistent, and stable— onto observations that by deﬁnition relate 
           di7erent  points  in  space- time,  and  then  are  surprised  that  reality 
           behaves other than what we expect. We are surprised that the one 
           observation seems to change the other because we assume, naturally, 
           the unity of the reality in which those observations take place. They 
           are part of, we believe, the same chunk of space-time,  of reality stu7. 
           But this shared reality stu7 is of our own making. And thus our sur-
           prise is something like that of Funes at seeing his face in the mirror. 
           Which should make us pause. For Funes’s surprise depended on an 
           illegitimate assumption.
              Our observations always entail, require, a blurring of the now, 
           a continuum of space- time. But then we turn that continuum into 
           the thing we are trying to observe instead of the means of observ-
           ing it and are surprised by the results. Funes is surprised at his own 
           face because he thinks the continuity of space-time  he brings with 
           him to his observation pertains to the reality he is observing. It does 
           not. The unity of his self is not a thing in reality; it is the means of 
           his  observing  anything  at  all. We think  we  can  home  in  on  each 
           moment of Achilles’s path through space- time as he takes over the 
           tortoise, but we cannot. His path is not a thing in reality; it is the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   183                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           184             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           means of our observing his race. We think we should see the path of 
           the particle, but we cannot. Its path is not a thing in reality; it is the 
           means of our observing its place or momentum.
             Because  observations  relate  events  in  space  and  time,  they  are 
           subject to the intrinsic limits of knowledge. As we stretch our minds 
           to encompass everything, we inevitably encounter the very limits 
           of what is capable of being comprehended, the limits inherent in 
           observation itself. Space and time, as the cosmologist Marcelo Glei-
           ser puts it, are “descriptive tools we create to quantify the transfor-
           mations of the natural world.”44 At the scale of the universe, “we live 
           in a spherical bubble of information.”45 Likewise, at the quantum 
           scale we encounter a similarly unsurpassable limit on the informa-
           tion we can extract from the world. As Borges concluded so many 
           years ago, we must suspect that there is no universe, at least in the 
           organic sense we attribute to that word.46 For all the reality we grant 
           it, that universe is a human construct.
             And how could it have been otherwise? This is where Einstein, so 
           seldom wrong, failed. Heisenberg, he cautioned, was speaking of our 
           knowledge of nature and no longer about what nature really does. 
           But in science, the greatest scientist of all insisted, we ought to be 
           concerned only with what nature does.47 On this point Heisenberg 
           would never agree, insisting until the end that what we observe is 
           not nature itself but nature exposed to our method of questioning.48
             Heisenberg was willing to face the consequences of his realiza-
           tion that our science is always an exploration of the world as it is 
           revealed to us, in space and time. Indeed, the uncertainty principle 
           tells us with enormous precision what the limits on that knowledge 
           are in the world of the very small, just as relativity tells us with enor-
           mous  precision  that  what  we  can  know  here  and  now  about  the 
           larger universe around us is fundamentally limited by the speed of 
           light. Those limits are baked into reality, yes, because our knowledge 
           is also baked in. For what does “position” mean, what does “momen-
           tum” mean, outside a measurer, a knower who seeks to determine 
           them? Likewise, what could the shape of the cosmos in space and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   184                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                    Gravitas                      185

           time  possibly  mean  independent  of  someone  positioned  in  time 
           and  space,  for  whom  the  cosmos  can  assume  a  shape  in  the  ﬁrst 
           place?
              Like Heisenberg, Einstein had read Kant. He even brought Kant’s 
           Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics along for some light summer 
           reading on the Baltic Sea in 1918, to help him come down from the 
           herculean e7ort of formulating general relativity.49 But on this point 
           Einstein had missed the memo. If Kant was saying anything, and he 
           was certainly saying a lot, it was this: we are never concerned solely 
           with what nature does; we are always speaking of what we know 
           about nature.
              But Heisenberg grasped something else. Like Kant, he grasped 
           what happens when we overlook that fundamental fact.50 As we’ll 
           see in the next chapter, Kant’s realization of the role reason has in 
           creating the image we have of nature gives us the key to understand-
           ing  the  relationship  of  scientiﬁc  knowledge  to  our  experience  of 
           beauty; it also helps solve one of the most perplexing mysteries of 
           modern cosmology: how the universe evolved to support life.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   185                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only


                                      9

                        MADE TO MEASURE


                 , $0-#1#/ $%&1- /"A&* toward the deepest recesses of the 
                 past to understand the very origins of existence, cosmologists 
          Bopened a Pandora’s box of philosophical enigmas. Among 
           these, one stands out: had the fundamental laws of nature diverged 
           from their actual values by even vanishingly small degrees, the uni-
           verse would not have evolved to sustain any kind of life resembling 
           our own. In short, the cosmos appears made to measure, constructed 
           with the purpose of producing beings like us who can in turn mea-
           sure  it,  study  its  mysteries,  and  ask  fundamental  questions  about 
           their own origins.
             The enigma of the improbability of human existence started to 
           arise not long a.er it became clear that the universe expands and 
           hence must have had a starting point in time. Already in 1951 the 
           astronomer Fred Hoyle established that the forces holding together 
           atomic nuclei had to be within a thousandth of their actual value 
           for oxygen and carbon to be produced at the levels needed to sus-
           tain life.1 In 1999 cosmologists discovered that if the early universe 
           had been more homogeneous, galaxies and hence stars and planets 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   186                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   187

           might never have formed, but if it had been less homogeneous, with 
           more prominent ripples of energy and matter, the resulting universe 
           would have turned out so clumpy that today it would consist mostly 
           of black holes— not the most hospitable home for life as we know it.
              Another of the “dials” that had to be precisely set if life were to 
           eventually emerge showed up when Einstein used general relativity 
           to describe the whole of the universe. As we saw before, to ensure 
           that  a  four- dimensional space- time sphere  remained  stable  over 
           time, as he believed any self- respecting universe must do, he slipped 
           an extra number into his calculations, which he later regretted. And 
           yet, years later, scientists discovered a mysterious force pushing the 
           expansion of the universe that clocks in at just about the value that 
           Einstein came up with—a  little too large and the universe curves 
           back into itself and crunches together; a little too small and it curves 
           out from itself and tears itself apart.2
              Estimates of the degree of ﬁne- tuning the laws of nature must 
           have  had  vary  enormously,  depending  on  what  result  one  hopes 
           to  explain.  Whereas  a  run- of- the- mill,  could- sustain- some- kind- of- 
           existence universe might cost us an improbability of one in a thou-
           sand or so, a made- to- order cosmos within shouting distance of our 
           own comes with a price tag so steep that its zeros would outnumber 
           all the atoms in the universe.3
              The  philosophical  problem  that  emerged  from  the  realization 
           that our very existence as sentient beings owes a great deal to chance 
           has led some scientists to what they call the anthropic principle. This 
           principle takes two forms: a “weak” one that scientists o.en accept 
           as likely true but not particularly mind- blowing as revelations go; 
           and a “strong” one that comes across to most scientists like a lot of 
           hocus- pocus. The strong anthropic principle also goes by the name 
           of “design”—as  in, to explain how something as wildly improbable 
           as intelligent life emerged from such a potentially inhospitable set 
           of possibilities requires us to presume that a being of vast power 
           and intelligence planned it that way. The weak anthropic principle, 
           in contrast, simply concedes that, as improbable as it may seem that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   187                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           188             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           the universe emerged to support intelligent life, it would be more 
           improbable for life to ﬁnd itself living in a universe that didn’t sup-
           port it.
             While most scientists tend to harbor distaste for obviously meta-
           physical solutions such as presented by the strong anthropic princi-
           ple, one cosmological theory that emerges from the weak principle 
           has garnered some interest. This theory, known as the multiverse, 
           posits that all possible universes in fact exist, and that our own is 
           one in an innumerable set of universes of inﬁnitely di7erent sizes, 
           shapes, and durations, each with its own set of laws and constants. 
           If this were true, supporters say, it would solve the problem of the 
           improbability of a life-supporting  cosmos. As one proponent of this 
           theory describes it, if you walked into a clothing store with only one 
           suit on its racks, and it happened to ﬁt, you would be rightfully sur-
           prised. If you walked into a store whose racks teemed with suits and 
           one happened to ﬁt, this would be considerably less surprising. The 
           multiverse theory e7ectively turns a one-suit  store into an inﬁnite- 
           suits store.4
             Whether in its strong or weak versions, ﬁnding a suit that ﬁts is a 
           telling metaphor for the anthropic principle. The improbability of 
           the laws of nature that would support our existence seems incom-
           mensurable with the fact of our existence. We feel a need to resolve 
           this tension, to explain how such improbable laws came about. So, 
           like Sherlock Holmes we investigate and come up with a series of 
           explanations. We desire to ﬁnd the answer to the mystery, but we 
           also desire it to end in a certain way; namely, we want to learn some-
           thing new, but also something that makes sense, that ﬁts into what 
           we already know.
             To ﬁnd that the initial settings of the universe are a random set of 
           numbers that could just as easily have been di7erent seems clunky, 
           infelicitous, something like plowing through a mystery novel, only 
           to ﬁnd out that the murderer is some random character we haven’t 
           even encountered yet. We yearn for a more aesthetically satisfying, 
           even beautiful, answer. The anthropic principle in both its versions 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   188                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   189

           seeks to respond to that yearning by showing us as an inevitable out-
           come of the initial settings. Either inﬁnite universes exist and our 
           own existence selects for the conditions that support us, or a single 
           universe was created with purpose to sustain life. To put it another 
           way, either we take an idea, namely, the mathematical models we 
           have arrived at to explain the universe, and grant it the privilege of 
           really existing in the form of the multiverse, or we elevate actual 
           reality to the level of the ultimate idea, namely, God’s plan.
              The belief in some element of design or intention in the forma-
           tion of the universe has had a long history. The medieval theologian 
           Thomas Aquinas deduced from the evidently ordered nature of the 
           world  that “there  is  some  intelligent  being  by  whom  everything 
           in nature is directed to a goal, and this we call ‘God.’ ”5 The key to 
           Aquinas’s deduction is the notion of purpose. Either things happen 
           without a purpose and hence occur by random chance, he reasoned, 
           or they are guided toward an end. Since it is evident that something 
           as extraordinary as life, and human life to boot, could hardly come 
           about by the random meanderings of blind chance, it follows that 
           the  universe  has  purpose,  namely,  the  creation  and  sustenance  of 
           human life.
              The idea of purpose extends beyond the simple attribution of 
           the rigor we ﬁnd in nature to a divine mind. In Kant’s time, it had 
           become a philosophical commonplace to read the evidence coming 
           from organic life as a sign of a kind of causality that transcended the 
           merely mechanical. To a degree, Kant accepted these arguments. As 
           he reasoned in the last of his great works, whereas the various parts 
           of a watch are a7ect ed by encountering one another and impart-
           ing motion, organic matter, such as the seed that takes nourishment 
           from the earth and sun and turns it with time into a tremendous 
           oak, exhibits an entirely di7erent kind of causal power.6 As the seed 
           develops, Kant reasoned, the intricate causal links from cell to cell, 
           moment to moment of its growth, appear to be guided by the idea 
           of what the seed always had to be.
              In Kant’s time, the kind of extra causality he attributed to organic 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   189                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           190             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           matter was widely thought to be at work in the world in general. 
           Leibniz’s thought, somewhat simpliﬁed and perhaps even degraded 
           under the enormous inﬂuence of Christian Wol7’s teaching, had its 
           followers looking for an ultimate purpose pretty much everywhere. 
           Sunlight, Wol7  had  proclaimed, exhibits  purpose  because  with  it 
           “we can conveniently carry on our duties, which cannot be done in 
           the evening at all, or at least not so handily and with di<culties.”7 
           For conﬁrmation biases of this magnitude, Kant had little more than 
           scorn. Indeed, he liked to respond by citing Voltaire’s famous lam-
           poon of Leibniz in his play Candide, whose titular character would 
           claim with a straight face that God had obviously given men noses 
           so as better to hold up their spectacles.8
             Kant knew he was walking a ﬁne line, on the one hand ridiculing 
           the most obvious examples of imputing intelligent design to nature 
           while, on the other, holding out the possibility of some other cau-
           sality at work than the strictly mechanistic. What this other causal-
           ity might be and how to understand its relation to the necessity of 
           mechanistic causality would become the centerpiece of his last great 
           work. It was in this book, which was ultimately about artistic crea-
           tion as much as our understanding of the natural world, that Kant 
           worked out the solution to a mystery that unites science and the arts, 
           the mystery of what guided a genius like Einstein as he teased an 
           explanation for gravity out of the subtle geometry of space and time, 
           or one like Heisenberg when, in the dark of night on the windswept 
           island of Heligoland, he saw spread before him the mathematics of 
           nature in all its splendor. For as much as their discoveries di7ered, 
           one and the same lodestar led both scientists to their insights. They 
           knew their theories to be right because they perceived them to be 
           beautiful.9


           +%"$ 9")&*  "# '(H&:$, a  person,  an  experience,  beautiful?  The 
           ancients long had an answer for this question. Unless we resign our-
           selves to a concept of aesthetic appreciation as the mere expression 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   190                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   191

           of ﬂeeting and meaningless pleasures, the perception of beauty must 
           indicate a more noble, unchanging idea underlying it. For Plato, just 
           as a person’s beauty indicated the presence of a good and wise soul, 
           the harmony of nature and the harmony of mathematics were signs 
           that, in its transience, the physical world expressed permanent and 
           perfect ideas that guide and form it. This was also the position of 
           the  rationalist  philosophers  who  believed  that  the  natural  world 
           expressed  God’s  preestablished  harmony,  and  it  was  the  position 
           that dominated Germany when, as he was wont to do, Immanuel 
           Kant decided to step in.
              In the spring of 1786, Kant was at the height of his intellectual 
           powers. He had also become the academic equivalent of a rock star. 
           Already a third book dedicated to his philosophy would appear that 
           year; across Germany, university courses about his work were pop-
           ping up; and the older generation’s best- known philosopher, Moses 
           Mendelssohn, had just laid on Kant the epithet of “all- crushing.”10 
           Perhaps most tellingly, people had started to wonder if Kant’s phi-
           losophy just might be dangerous. A rumor quickly spread that his 
           famously  di<cult  writing  had  driven  at  least  one  student  insane, 
           and  a  popular  psychologist  inveighed  against  the  study  of  Kant’s 
           writings, warning that they could “deaden the love of true learning” 
           and “draw the attention away from the concerns of human life as 
           well as from the works of art and nature which warm the heart and 
           heighten the imagination.” Reading Kant and his ilk, he grumbled, 
           would “unsettle the powers of the understanding, spoil good prin-
           ciples, and poison the source of human happiness.” Such sensation-
           alism aside, Kant’s writing might indeed have led to at least some 
           risky behavior. At the University of Jena, one student insinuated that 
           a colleague who had dared to make a comment about Kant would 
           need thirty years of study to understand the thinker. For good mea-
           sure he then added that thirty more would be in order before the 
           fellow  should  open  his  mouth  on  the  subject.  Naturally,  a  duel 
           ensued.11
              Between  engaging  in  debates,  fending  o7  critical  reviews,  and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   191                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           192             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           ﬁnishing the second edition of his masterwork, not to mention serv-
           ing as rector of the university, Kant had his hands full. Yet his heart 
           was not in it. For a large portion of his time had become absorbed 
           by the waning health of his best friend, Joseph Green. Each a.er-
           noon he went to sit next to Green’s sickbed, staying beside his ailing 
           friend until the hour he would have le. his house had they dined 
           together. This lasted until the day of Green’s death on June 27. Kant 
           was devasted. From that moment he ceased to socialize in restau-
           rants and cafés, and his social circles shrank. He would continue to 
           visit a few friends in their homes, but for most of his meals Kant 
           began to employ a cook and eat at home.12
             The  following  year  Kant  decided  to  institutionalize  this  prac-
           tice.  So,  with  another  friend  and  former  student,  Christian  Jacob 
           Kraus, he  established  a  dining  club  that  would  regularly  meet  in 
           his house. The ritual started slowly. On Easter Day 1787, Hamann 
           went  with  his  children  to  call  on  Kraus  at  his  house, where  they 
           were told they could ﬁnd him at Kant’s house. When they arrived, 
           they “found the two bachelors in a cold room, completely frozen.”13 
           Delighted to see them, Kant had some ﬁne wine brought in, and 
           the day brightened considerably.14 From these inauspicious embers 
           a crackling social ﬁre grew. Many of the most prominent citizens of 
           Königsberg would gather for meals at Kant’s house, and many more 
           would number among those visitors to the town who came to pay 
           their respects to the great philosopher, only to end up, pleasantly 
           surprised, sitting at his table.
             Kant enjoyed these dinners immensely and would eagerly await 
           the hour of his guests’ arrival. Once the meal had started, he relished 
           the  role  of  host,  personally  handing  out  silverware  and  enchant-
           ing his guests with amusing patter. The meals materialized as if the 
           order of the dishes were determined by an ethical maxim (in Kant’s 
           mind they likely were): “Only three dishes, but excellently prepared 
           and very tasty, two bottles of wine, and when in season there was 
           fruit and dessert.”15 If guests tried to say grace before dinner, Kant 
           would  cut  them  o7,  evincing  an  impatience  with  religiosity  that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   192                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   193

           would increasingly threaten to alienate him from the legal authori-
           ties. He would also interrupt and change the subject if diners of a 
           philosophical inclination tried to talk shop. But he would happily 
           dish out the juicy political gossip of the day alongside the tender 
           roast he served with the best English mustard. The core group that 
           attended these dinners became Kant’s lifeline. By the time he died 
           some seventeen years later, the two dozen or so who remained from 
           this circle of dining friends would carry his co<n.16
              Seventeen eighty- seven was also the year Kant published the sec-
           ond edition of his Critique of Pure Reason. He had put the time and 
           e7ort  into  this  task  because  he  felt  it  necessary  to  clarify  and,  in 
           some cases, modify his claims, but now he was eager to get on to his 
           next project. As he wrote to a correspondent in June of that year, he 
           needed to avoid taking on any further reviews or engaging in more 
           debates about his prior work so he could devote his attention to 
           bringing out a “Critique of the Foundations of Taste.”
              Applying his critical method to questions of aesthetic apprecia-
           tion was not incidental. Kant saw in our ability to have rational dis-
           cussions about beauty a linchpin without which his entire system 
           would remain unstable. In the ﬁrst Critique, Kant had shown that 
           the condition of possibility of our perceiving anything at all was our 
           innate ability to translate an otherwise bewildering chaos of sensory 
           input into ordered events in space and time whose causal relations 
           could be objectively established. Such objectivity in turn required 
           the presumption of a total unity of the physical world, a mechanis-
           tic chain of causality from past to future, just as our ability to stitch 
           disparate moments in time together depended on the presumption 
           of a uniﬁed seat of consciousness. Crucially, Kant realized that we 
           must presuppose such unity even though we can never verify it in 
           our experience— never see the universe as a coherent object in space 
           and time; never see the self on its own, apart from the ﬂow of experi-
           ences it sutures together. Similarly, Kant now realized, whenever we 
           connect two or more speciﬁc claims as being examples of a more 
           general truth, of an idea that contains them both, the very coherence 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   193                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           194             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           of our judgments requires us to assume a web of connections that 
           links each speciﬁc instance to the whole of creation, even though 
           that whole can never itself be an object of our experience.
             Here, Kant said, lay the harmony that the ancients had identiﬁed 
           as the source of beauty. For when we perceive the chaos of data we 
           receive about the world to be connected by an underlying unifying 
           idea, we ﬁnd that amalgam to be beautiful, harmonious, complete 
           on its own. Our desire to explain further is disarmed, and we ﬁnd 
           ourselves enraptured in contemplating a scene that requires noth-
           ing more of us, something for which we need to supply no exter-
           nal purpose because it carries its purpose entirely in itself. This is 
           a feeling Kant believed we experienced in the presence of great art. 
           As the conductor Marin Alsop once said about a symphony of Gus-
           tav Mahler’s, every note is there for a reason.17 Each of its elements 
           is situated exactly right and couldn’t be elsewhere, hence the piece 
           seems necessary, inevitable, yet in no way could we have come upon 
           it on our own, in which case it would give us the sense of being 
           hackneyed, clichéd.
             Ancient philosophers were thus right in believing that we are 
           attracted to and ﬁnd beautiful those common principles that we dis-
           cover underlying and unifying the bewildering diversity of nature. 
           When Plato argued that we feel joy or pleasure upon discovering a 
           mathematical rule expressed in nature, he touched on an essential 
           faculty of our cognition that permits us to recognize and appreciate 
           the purposiveness of nature— the purposiveness that expresses itself 
           in the seed that grows to become a mighty oak, the purposiveness 
           that seems to tell us this must have been designed this way.
             While Kant agreed that we feel something is beautiful when we 
           sense something like purposiveness in it, he believed the ancients 
           erred  in  thinking  such  purposiveness  was  an  essential  aspect  of 
           nature itself. As he wrote, “In the necessity of that which is purposive 
           and so constituted as if it were intentionally arranged for our use, 
           but which nevertheless seems to pertain originally to the essence of 
           things, without any regard to our use, lies the ground for the great 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   194                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   195

           admiration of nature.”18 Key here is the phrase “as if.” The ground 
           for our admiration, Kant insisted, lies not outside in the world but 
           in  our  reason’s  relation  to  the  picture  we  make  of  the  world.  So 
           powerful is the draw of that picture’s coherence that the ancients 
           projected  it  outward  into  the  world  itself,  transforming  an  inner 
           sense of purposiveness into an actual purpose. There is indeed pur-
           posiveness, structure, rigor in our picture of nature, Kant replied, 
           but it is supplied by our own reason.
              Just as Kant showed that we must presuppose the existence of 
           a whole, uniﬁed cosmos for our individual observations to cohere, 
           even though we can never grasp that whole cosmos as an object, the 
           harmony between parts of a system and its internal guiding prin-
           ciple is not an empirical fact that can be established for once and 
           for  all  but  a  presumption  necessary  for  deriving  laws  in  the  ﬁrst 
           place. We cannot see the oak tree in the seed, and yet we also cannot 
           coherently grasp how seeds develop into oak trees without imag-
           ining  them  as  being  guided  by  a  ﬁnal  purpose  throughout  their 
           growth. Discovering such harmony ignites in us a feeling of beauty, 
           and we are driven to it— not only in works of art or the apprecia-
           tion of nature, but in science itself. Indeed, the standards that sci-
           entists report as guiding their preferences— the preference for the 
           economy  of  nature’s  laws  over  their  proﬂigacy;  the  ideal  of  sim-
           plicity that guided science from Newton’s discovery of the laws of 
           motion to Einstein’s gorgeous simpliﬁcation and incorporation of 
           gravity— make sense when we see them no longer as part of nature 
           itself but as things we impose on nature to make sense of it.19
              In  this  respect,  our  appreciation  of  artistic  works  provides  us 
           with a model for detecting purposiveness in nature. In artworks like 
           Mahler’s symphonies, we recognize a masterful hand that had a rea-
           son for placing each note where it was. We know there is a purpose 
           there, and we hear it as we progress through the symphony; we mar-
           vel at its perfection. In nature we experience a similar marvel when 
           we contemplate the towering oak that emerged from a tiny seed or 
           realize that the movement of every massive object in the skies can be 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   195                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           196             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           described and predicted by a few calculations. But whereas in nature 
           we are attracted by the sense of a guiding hand even when there is 
           none,  in  art  the  analogy  is  reversed:  we  are  attracted  to  products 
           of a guiding hand where the hand itself has become invisible. For 
           a work of art whose artistry is too evident loses its ability to cause 
           wonder; it becomes staid and predictable. In both art and nature, 
           we see beauty in signs of purposiveness without purpose, natural 
           artistry— but with an important di7erence. Whereas in nature we 
           supply the artist, in art we supply the sense of its naturalness, that it 
           was produced without evident artiﬁce.
             This structural analogy between the natural and the artistic both 
           animates our appreciation of the products of the imagination and 
           provides a standard for judgments about disputes of taste. The fact 
           is, we do this all the time. Let’s return to the example of a mystery 
           novel. You make it through three-hundred-  plus pages, and the cul-
           prit turns out to be a character you’ve never met before with no con-
           nection to the story so far. Surprising? Certainly, but no one in their 
           right mind would judge this to be an excellent way to end the story. 
           Now let’s say that in the mystery you’re reading, each clue led so 
           inevitably to the ﬁnal revelation that you could see it coming a hun-
           dred pages before the end. Clearly that would be unsatisfying as well. 
           In the ﬁrst case you would be faced with a random occurrence, an 
           unmotivated insertion into the structure of the novel that destroyed 
           any sense of its coherence, its purposiveness. The novel is certainly 
           surprising, but there is nothing inevitable about it—the  occurrences 
           seem random, without purpose. In the second case, however, you’ve 
           seen the author’s handiwork the whole way through; it’s all inevita-
           bility with no surprise, all artiﬁce with no naturalness. Unlike with 
           Mahler, our ﬁrst reaction is that we could do that ourselves just by 
           following a recipe. The result is a work of “art” that no one wants to 
           spend their time on.
             Purposiveness  without  purpose  is  thus  a  model  for  making 
           claims about the aesthetic value of works of art, since we ﬁnd art 
           beautiful if it exhibits a harmony as if it had arisen there naturally. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   196                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   197

           In this way it releases us from the conundrum of radical subjectiv-
           ism, whereby all are entitled to their own opinion about a work’s 
           value and there are no rational bases for arguing about it. The irony 
           of such subjectivism is that while it sounds coherent enough (how 
           indeed can I trump someone’s argument that, hey, this is beautiful 
           because I ﬁnd it beautiful?), no one in practice seems to believe it. 
           As Kant puts it, in matters of taste there is a real di7erence between 
           saying you like something and saying that it is beautiful. In the lat-
           ter case your statement implicitly demands concurrence, whereas in 
           the former it does not.20 Purposiveness without purpose provides an 
           objective standard for arguing why one ﬁnds one work more beauti-
           ful than another.
              But purposiveness without purpose is also a model for under-
           standing the appeal of scientiﬁc explanations of the natural world, 
           since we are attracted by theories that reveal the harmony between 
           speciﬁc observations and a general explanation as if that harmony 
           had been put there by design. This ﬁt between the knowability of the 
           world and our ability to know it engenders aesthetic pleasure—not  
           a fulﬁllment of personal beneﬁt or the satisfaction of appetite, but 
           the pure joy of experiencing, in a ﬂash, how a single rule explains 
           the functioning of seemingly disparate aspects of nature.
              In  a  satisfying  work  of  art,  the  ensemble  of  its  elements  con-
           forms to its internal principle, the idea that guides it. Thus, when we 
           come to the end of a mystery novel, the solution appears inevitable, 
           although we couldn’t see it coming. Likewise, when we ﬁnd a theo-
           retical explanation for the seemingly random events of the natural 
           world, we feel the same aesthetic satisfaction as with a well- wrought 
           plot or a masterfully composed symphony: we thrill to the diversity 
           of  nature  expressing  the  idea  of  its  order,  its  inherent  rigor.  That 
           guiding principle that we read in nature or in art appears to us its 
           purpose. But just as the work of art ignites our aesthetic judgment 
           only when its creator has erased the signs of artiﬁce, so our under-
           standing of the natural world is led by a silent conviction that the 
           universe that unveils itself before our eyes works toward an end and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   197                                2/10/2023   11:36
                              for reference only

           198             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           purpose,  one  it  expresses  from  the  greatest  cataclysms  of  galaxies 
           down to the most intimate crevices of possible perception, and yet 
           one that was never meant, never intended, never planned by angel, 
           god, or human mind, other than our own.


           "* " #&+ 8&:"8&  dawned,  Kant  was  feeling  impatient.  During 
           the last, astoundingly productive ten years he had published more 
           important,  not  to  say  world- changing,  works  of  philosophy  on  a 
           wider array of topics than pretty much anyone before him. But two 
           of his most widely read works during that time, the Groundwork for 
           the  Metaphysics  of  Morals  and The  Critique  of  Practical  Reason,  had 
           taken far longer to appear in print than he had anticipated. Now, 
           eager  to  see  the  third  major  chapter  of  his  critical  philosophy  in 
           bookstores and sparking conversations, he decided to change pub-
           lishers. Between  January  and  March  1790, he  sent  his  new  editor 
           in Berlin his manuscript of the Critique of the Power of Judgment in 
           four batches as he ﬁnished them. The editor had clearly gotten the 
           memo. By April, Kant was already grumbling about having to plow 
           through page proofs, and the book would appear shortly therea.er.21
             As busy as this period was, other tasks loomed. Kant was not get-
           ting any younger, and he had his philosophical legacy to attend to. 
           Anyone getting the kind of attention he now found focused on him 
           was bound to become the target of some negative reviews, and one 
           managed to get under Kant’s skin. The criticism, the work of one 
           J. A. Eberhard, came out in four volumes over three years. Even as 
           Kant was rushing to ﬁnish his third Critique, the tenor of the attack 
           started to irk him. In essence, Eberhard accused Kant of not being 
           original; he claimed that Leibniz had foreseen Kant and worked out 
           a better system. Moreover, in the few ways they di7ered, Kant had 
           simply gotten it wrong.22
             Kant was not about to take this lying down. In the brief hiatus 
           between sending in the preface and introduction of the third Cri-
           tique to his editor on March 22 and receiving the proofs a month 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   198                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   199

           later, he published a small book in response. The title, On a Discovery 
           According to Which Any New Critique of Pure Reason Has Been Made 
           Superﬂuous by an Earlier One, would have made Borges proud for its 
           temporal acrobatics and dripping irony. In “discovering” that Leib-
           niz’s philosophy was somehow a better critique of pure reason than 
           Kant’s even prior to Kant’s dismantling of it, Eberhard had not only 
           utterly failed to understand what Kant was doing; he had also pretty 
           much  mangled  Leibniz  in  the  process,  exposing  him “to  ridicule 
           just when he thinks he is providing him with an apology.”23
              Obviously,  Kant’s  system  agreed  signiﬁcantly  with  Leibniz’s, 
           Kant conceded. Speciﬁcally, both systems argued for a kind of har-
           mony between the natural world and the moral one. The distinc-
           tion, however, lay in how each thinker got there, and this distinction 
           made all the di7erence. For Leibniz the very reason we could trust 
           the laws of physics was the reason to trust the existence of an ulti-
           mate moral law, for just as surely as God’s hand guided the one, it 
           had to be guiding the other. The lawfulness of nature and of moral-
           ity emerged from the programmer’s code, and all we had to do was 
           read it. Kant’s critical philosophy had upended this way of thinking 
           for good. Nature’s ultimate lawfulness, the necessary link between 
           cause and e7ect, the tendrils connecting genus and species— all of 
           these could be derived as necessary presuppositions of our ability 
           to perceive individual objects in time and space. They were aspects 
           of our knowledge, to be sure, but also aspects with necessity and 
           hence  objectivity.  Likewise,  as  we  will  see  in  greater  detail  in  the 
           next chapter, the ultimate freedom of the human subject to choose 
           and the nature of its moral duty could not depend on any religious 
           doctrine or earthly tradition, but was a necessary presupposition for 
           a being who ﬁnds itself confronting moral choices, because a being 
           that was truly unfree and merely adri. in the ﬂow of causal connec-
           tions could only ever do as it was inclined to do; the mere fact of 
           being faced with choices required the postulate of freedom.
              So, harmony exists between the natural world and the moral one, 
           between empirical judgments of causality and free moral choices, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   199                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           200             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           but only if one understands, as Leibniz had not yet, that this har-
           mony ﬂows not from a divine code but as a necessary condition of 
           possibility of our ability to perceive and think about the movement 
           of bodies in space and time and to make decisions in a social world. 
           Kant’s work could indeed be considered the real defense of Leibniz, 
           Kant concluded— a defense, namely, against such ostensible defend-
           ers as Eberhard himself.24
             Kant’s review had eviscerated the hapless critic. If alternate philo-
           sophical paths to the Kantian revolution had held any attraction for 
           young thinkers, this slap- down pretty much nipped those growths 
           in the bud. As the last decade of the eighteenth century debuted, 
           philosophy in Germany, for all intents and purposes, had become a 
           footnote to the work of one man, a man who had attained the stat-
           ure of, in the words of an admiring visitor, the king of Königsberg.
             Kant trounced his critic so decisively in part because the book 
           he had just ﬁnished writing, his Critique of the Power of Judgment, 
           had ﬁnally clariﬁed exactly how to salvage the lawfulness of nature 
           without  falling  prey  to  the  metaphysical  grandiosity  of  claiming 
           to  discern  its  ultimate  purpose.  For  the  presumption  of  an  invis-
           ible  hand  guiding  nature  is  pervasive;  we  see  it  in  how  scientists 
           choose one theory over another because of its economy, simplicity, 
           or beauty; we see it when physicists li. the veil of nature and dis-
           cover the mathematical laws that structure it; we see it at work in the 
           greatest of minds, as when Einstein denied that the Old One plays 
           dice with the universe.
             Kant also saw this apparent guiding hand at work, especially in 
           his  approach  to  the  organic  world.  Indeed,  Kant  seemed  to  pres-
           age Darwin by half a century when he wrote that a more fulsome 
           natural history would “trace back a host of apparently diverse types 
           of races to one and the same genus.”25 But where others would see 
           such manifestations of teleological causality as evidence of a greater 
           power at work in nature, Kant saw a conﬂict within our faculty of 
           reason between two ways of ordering its impressions. The ﬁrst of 
           these  modes  correctly  grasps  the  causal  relations  between  events 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   200                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   201

           within space- time; however, when reason uses that mode to follow 
           its  investigations  of  space-time  events  to  their  extremes— when  it 
           inquires about those ultimate questions, such as the shortest sliver 
           of space- time, the edge of the universe, the ultimate cause of every-
           thing, or the possibility of making a free choice—it  arrives at a point 
           where mechanistic explanations fall short. Such questions require a 
           di7erent mode of thinking, one that asks why this law, why this over-
           all structure, why these initial conditions and not some others, why 
           this choice and not that one.
              Each mode of thinking— one concerned with mechanistic steps 
           within  and  the  other  with  the  holistic  question  of  purpose—is  
           necessary and justiﬁed in its own sphere. When we confuse them, 
           however, error and even fanaticism ensue. Perhaps we end up like 
           Candide, blithely insisting that we inhabit the best of all possible 
           worlds, for how else could God have chosen this one for us? Worse, 
           we  might  become  convinced  the  world  is  a  manifestation  of  our 
           idea of its ultimate purpose, that we are required to intervene with 
           ﬁre and fury to set things right. Or, as rational scientists, we might 
           end up expressing amazement that the laws of nature would be so 
           ﬁnely tuned as to permit our existence and feel forced to conjure 
           rather less than parsimonious theories to account for the gratifying 
           ﬁt.
              Our astonishment, however, belies the mere fact that what is, is; 
           that the world as we ﬁnd it must always be the starting point for 
           our investigations; that to seek to account for the improbability of 
           the universe existing is like expressing delight that out of eight bil-
           lion possible souls you had the luck to be born as you. Just as there 
           was no you before you were born to feel lucky for, we don’t need to 
           imagine the fate of all those universes that didn’t evolve into ours. 
           For such is the sleight of hand of both the Leibnizian rationalist 
           and modern advocates of the multiverse, who transform the math-
           ematical reasoning that allows us to explain the world as we ﬁnd it 
           in space and time into a vision of the cosmos as an unconditioned 
           whole, planting it there in the desert before creation, only to then 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   201                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           202             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           feel awe that it should have grown this way at all.
             This,  then,  was  Kant’s  insight:  the  deist  who  believes  the  uni-
           verse came about by design and the atheist physicist who turns to 
           theories like the multiverse to explain the extreme improbability of 
           our own creation both err. They err by treating individual events in 
           space- time as if they were guided by a ghost in the machine; they 
           err, likewise, by  conceiving  of  the  entirety  of  existence  as  a  thing 
           in time and space, subject to the vicissitudes of cause and e7ect, a 
           bauble in the hands of the god of very large things. But deists and 
           scientists confronting the improbability of our existence do not err 
           when they feel awe; their mistake lies in the source they attribute to 
           that feeling and the scenarios they come up with to explain it away. 
           For just as our power of judgment, when correctly understood and 
           limited, sees beauty in nature’s laws as in the well- constructed work 
           of art, it supplies a di7erent aesthetic feeling when faced with the 
           incommensurability between what we can grasp with our limited 
           senses and the absolutely great or overwhelmingly powerful, those 
           cosmic  phenomena  that  utterly  outstrip  the  scale  of  our  human 
           perceptions.
             Faced with the irreconcilability of our cognition and the whole 
           of the cosmos, its origin and edge, or between that cognition and 
           the most minute alterations in space and time, we are struck not 
           by a feeling of beauty but by what Kant calls the sublime. The ver-
           tigo we feel in the face of the inﬁnitesimal; the awe we succumb 
           to when we face the inconceivable mathematics of the cosmos or 
           the cataclysmic raging of black holes we can never grasp with our 
           senses— confronted with these we are overcome with a sense of the 
           overwhelming scope and force of nature. And yet, Kant speciﬁes, at 
           the source of this feeling, this scintillating mélange of pleasure and 
           pain, lies not those objects themselves but a disposition of our souls. 
           For at the very moment we engage with phenomena that outstrip 
           our capacity to grasp them as a whole, we also witness the inexhaust-
           ibility  of  our  cognitive  means, which  permit  us  to  transcend  our 
           limited locales and stretch to the ends of the universe.26 That science 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   202                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   203

           can calculate the density of black holes or the values of fundamental 
           constants  of  nature  is  a  strength  beyond  measure.  Our  feeling  of 
           nature’s sublimity pays tribute to this: the force of our intellectual 
           capacities.
              The sublime, like the beautiful, does not reside in things in the 
           world,  whether  natural  or  made;  it  emerges  as  a  reaction  of  our 
           judgment to the representations we make of the world. For our rep-
           resentations to cohere, we must assume a greater order to them that 
           ultimately outstrips our ability to verify it. As we verify such order 
           locally,  our  judgment  gratiﬁes  us  with  a  feeling  of  beauty,  of  the 
           parts ﬁtting an ideal of the whole, a center that seems to contain the 
           astonishing variety of existence and give it sense or purpose. In con-
           trast, whenever we engage phenomena that threaten to overwhelm 
           our ability to grasp them with our senses, reason stretches in a vain 
           attempt to comprehend the very edges of totality itself, the border 
           conditions of the universe, small and large, and we are taken simul-
           taneously by our inadequacy to the challenge and by the awesome 
           power of reason that permits us to conceptualize that very impos-
           sibility in the ﬁrst place.
              The capillaries of coherence ﬂowing from species to genus, from 
           the particular to the universal, are the necessary presupposition that 
           permits  us  to  encounter  and  di7erentiate  particulars  in  the  ﬁrst 
           place.  As  we  uncover  those  patterns  of  coherence,  we  experience 
           their necessity and feel pleasure. Contemplating such purposiveness, 
           we are lulled by its harmony, but we simultaneously strive toward 
           a totality whose very incomprehensibility stokes that desire like an 
           ever- present dissonance we desperately wish to resolve. Stretching 
           out  from  ourselves  to  resolve  that  incompatibility,  we  ultimately 
           realize what we are striving for lies inside us; we ﬁnd ourselves in the 
           world and the world in ourselves. For when Kant contemplated “the 
           starry heavens above me and the moral law within me,” he was ﬁlled 
           with awe, an awe that sprang from the realization that, whether star-
           ing in or staring out, he was gazing into the same unfathomable 
           abyss.27


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   203                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           204             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           )"#$ $'') *&-1'0*2, $%&  notion  that  the  state  of  the  physical 
           world at any time ﬂows directly from the position and momentum 
           of its constituent particles at prior times. Any attempt to smuggle 
           another  kind  of  causality  into  that  chain  of  events  amounts  to  a 
           “mental jugglery that only reads the conception of an end into the 
           nature  of  the  things.”28  A  disembodied  soul  was  not,  for  Kant,  a 
           plausible answer. Nonetheless, although Kant considered the causal 
           chains that sustain our knowledge of the world in space and time to 
           be necessary, as he used his reason to pry open the linkages of space- 
           time, he encountered a roadblock there, an insurmountable impasse 
           that would arise whenever human cognition would try to apply the 
           logic of space and time beyond the limits of our ability to discern 
           di7erences in space and time.
             Precisely there, at the most minute points of continuity between 
           one moment and the next, Kant saw an antinomy rear its head. On 
           the one side, a perfectly mechanistic chain, with no room for will-
           ful intervention into the course of history. On the other, spontane-
           ous freedom of choice, not only evidenced throughout history and 
           every living moment, but also, Kant believed, required by the very 
           nature of practical reason itself, a freedom inherent in the very acts 
           of judging ourselves and others that lie at the basis of all social orga-
           nization. Each side could be ﬂawlessly argued: every action in space 
           and time has an e<cient cause, and nothing is spontaneous; or, any 
           sequence of events must have an origin that is not caused, hence 
           spontaneity must exist.
             But like any antinomy, Kant could see that it did not arise from 
           an error on one side; rather, the error lay in a failure to understand 
           the basic structure and limits of human knowledge, and in our ten-
           dency to mix two ways of thinking about nature and the knowl-
           edge  we  have  of  it.  On  the  one  hand,  our  very  ability  to  discern 
           the most minimal change entails that our observation span at least 
           two moments and hence elude total absorption in the event being 
           observed. Thus, as we delve into each individual link in the causal 
           chain, we ﬁnd it relies on any two elements being related by a third, a 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   204                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   205

           mediator whose intervention must slip out unnoticed for the chain 
           to appear unbroken— just as the beads of condensation require the 
           physicist’s theory to produce an electron’s path in a cloud cham-
           ber.29 On the other hand, even as our very act of analyzing the world 
           seems to require it, we are unable to isolate that alien inﬂuence. No 
           matter how deeply we dig into the space-time  chain, we will never 
           ﬁnd a link put there by free choice; we can never ﬁnd a particle of 
           consciousness, a material embodiment of soul. For us to register the 
           moment  of  change  from  one  space- time cell  to  the  next  requires 
           that there exist some anchor in the ﬂow that can register di7erences, 
           and hence a pivot from which to choose what to observe. But try as 
           we may, we cannot ﬁnd that anchor and turn it into an object of our 
           cognition.
              Faced with this antinomy between freedom and determinism, 
           many modern scientists and thinkers have simply decided that one 
           side, freedom, needs to fall out of the equation. If freedom conﬂicts 
           with  science,  so  much  the  worse  for  freedom.  But  this  solution 
           entirely misses the point. The antinomy between mechanistic cau-
           sality and freedom is rife throughout scientiﬁc thinking and prac-
           tice, even among scientists who are unaware they are postulating 
           freedom at all. Freedom implies choice, implies selection. By deny-
           ing it to individuals in time and space, scientists and philosophers 
           who profess to believe exclusively in mechanistic causality reintro-
           duce it elsewhere, namely, at the edge of existence, in the form of 
           that magical set of conditions that allowed us to emerge, evolve, and 
           eventually observe the universe that birthed us.
              In the case of the strong anthropic principle, this move is obvi-
           ous, but it pertains to the weak principle’s concept of the multiverse 
           as well, just more subtly. Because what is free will other than the pre-
           sumption of something uncaused inserting itself in a causal chain? 
           In  the  case  of  the  anthropic  principle,  we  remove  that  uncaused 
           cause from within time and space, from within the causal chain, and 
           place it outside time and space, before universes birth, so that we can 
           say all initial settings give birth to all possible universes, and hence 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   205                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           206             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           explain away the improbability of our existence. We implicitly imag-
           ine a choice of universes outside space and time awaiting their man-
           ifestation in space- time to be tested out for their livability— much 
           like a shop ﬁlled with di7erently sized suits waiting to be tried on.
             But uncaused causality doesn’t belong outside time and space, 
           certainly not as a cognizable object, namely, a speciﬁc universe with 
           deﬁnable constants. Uncaused causality can never be found, never 
           turned into an object. As we will see in the next chapter, it can only 
           ever be, and in fact must be, presupposed in the context of human 
           choices. For when we do not do so, we treat humans as calculable 
           entities, as means to get from one causal link to another, and we 
           make an untenable presumption about the ultimate causal chain, 
           namely, that it is knowable from beginning to end.
             The outermost border of all that exists and has existed coincides 
           with the innermost point, a point where one moment slides into the 
           next, where a here di7ers ever so slightly from a there, thus allowing 
           something like an experience of the world to take form in the ﬁrst 
           place. Both are sites of the breakdown of causality because causality 
           happens in time and space, and both the edge of space-time  and 
           the instant of change are ideal assumptions that cannot be found in 
           space- time. Whenever we claim to encounter them from the outside, 
           to encompass them as knowable objects, we commit metaphysical 
           overreach, whether in the form of birthing phantom universes or 
           obliterating human freedom.
             This nexus between the edge of existence and the abyss of free-
           dom was what Kant identiﬁed when he said that the two things that 
           ﬁlled him with admiration and awe were the starry heavens above 
           and the moral law within. In both cases we are faced with the sub-
           lime, the aesthetic feeling produced by our realization that we can 
           conceive of something overwhelmingly absolute—the  cosmos in all 
           its magnitude, our implacable obligation to choose— from the con-
           ﬁnes of an existence hemmed in by space, time, and contingency. If 
           beauty guides us toward the coherence of nature as grasped by our 
           understanding, the sublime points to both the incommensurability 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   206                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                Made to Measure                   207

           of our abilities with that end and the inexhaustibility of the cogni-
           tive means at our disposal. Or, to say it again with Heisenberg, “The 
           ability of human beings to understand is without limit. About the 
           ultimate things we cannot speak.”30
              The antinomy between freedom and determinism thus emerges 
           from  the  very  tools  we  use  to  study  and  understand  the  cosmos. 
           We don’t escape it by assuming away freedom any more than we 
           escape it by placing an all-knowing  god at the origin of creation to 
           guide our every decision throughout history. For when we believe 
           that nature takes its orders from something akin to our reason, we 
           project a choice there, a selection from among a random or even 
           inﬁnite ﬁeld of options. We presume, in other words, the specter of 
           an original free choice even as we deny that freedom in our selves.
              We can make sense of the antinomy only when we understand 
           and accept that our cognition has two modes of ordering the world 
           as we encounter it and that both have their place. One pertains to 
           explaining local and discrete changes in space-time;  the other kicks 
           in whenever we explore the edges of our knowledge, whenever we 
           ask the big questions of where it all came from, what should I do, 
           and am I making this choice freely or am I constrained. When we 
           use the one in the domain of the other, when we think mechanisti-
           cally about our obligations or the whole of creation, or when we 
           apply teleological thinking as we drill down into the phenomena of 
           nature, we fall into error.
              Such  was  the  case  of  Heisenberg’s  radical  revelation.  Driven 
           by  Einstein’s  conviction  that  the  cosmos  must  have  a  ﬁnal  cause, 
           that God does not play dice, he drilled down far indeed into the 
           mechanisms mediating between tiny slivers of space-time,  into the 
           invisible spaces between the dots comprising an electron’s path in 
           a cloud chamber. But as Kant warned, “human reason, adhering to 
           this maxim and proceeding on these lines, could never discover a 
           particle of foundation” that would complete the picture of nature 
           as we expect it to be.31 Einstein and his followers would never tire 
           of seeking such a particle, the one that would eradicate the trouble-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   207                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           208             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           some quantum egg and put the world back on its expected footing. 
           Heisenberg somehow intuited that such a ﬁnal particle was, like the 
           paradoxical edge of existence itself, a stitch holding together the fab-
           ric of the world we dream, a tenuous and eternal crevice of unreason 
           that tells us it is false.
             In  the  ﬁnal  section  we  will  follow  Kant,  Borges,  and  Heisen-
           berg as they delved into that ﬁnal crevice of unreason that sprouts 
           between freedom and determinism, and that condemned them to 
           take responsibility for the choices that made them who they were.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   208                                2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                           Part IV

                                                   THE ABYSS OF 
                                                              FREEDOM


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   209                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   210                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                                      10

                               FREE WILL


                  #1:10* 9"#210* *&;&-1#0* ('&$%10*  was  thirteen  years 
                  old when the man who would one day have him tortured 
           Aand  executed  assumed  control  of  the  western  Roman 
           Empire. That man, the Ostrogoth king Theodoric the Great, initi-
           ated his long rule in typically violent style. A.er years of exchanging 
           battleﬁeld victories and defeats with Italy’s longtime ruler, Flavius 
           Odoacer,  Theodoric  stormed  Ravenna,  the  seat  of  Italy’s  political 
           power, and then surprised his rival by extending an o7er of peace. 
           On a fateful night in 493 CE, the two men and their retinues gath-
           ered for a feast to mend di7erences and divide the west between 
           them. But when Theodoric stood to give a toast, instead of raising 
           a goblet up, he brought his blade down on Odoacer’s neck as his 
           men fell upon the slain king’s entourage, putting them to the sword 
           before they could shake o7 their drunken stupor.
              For  the  next  thirty  years  Theodoric  ruled  the  western  empire, 
           his  Gothic  ﬁst  wrapped  in  the  satin  glove  of  the  civilized  mores 
           and institutions over which young Boethius, destined to become a 
           senator, would preside. A scion of the Roman aristocracy, Boethius 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   211                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           212             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           exempliﬁed  the  patrician  cult  of  learning  while  professing  the 
           Catholicism that by then had been widely embraced by the western 
           church. But while he was willing to serve in political roles, his ambi-
           tions were intellectual, not worldly—to  preserve and interpret the 
           ancient  sages,  to  unify  the  warring  philosophical  canons  of  Plato 
           and Aristotle, to weigh in on theological controversies.
             Boethius made his ﬁrst major intellectual contribution by inter-
           vening in just such a religious debate. Should theologians, as the 
           Arians  held,  understand  God  the  Father  as  separate  and  superior 
           to Jesus the Son? Or should they consider the two as identical, as 
           one  and  the  same  God?  Having  absorbed  Neoplatonic  thought 
           since a young age, Boethius now saw that for a statement of iden-
           tity between two terms to have any meaning, the terms also had to 
           exhibit some minimal di7erence. In other words, to say that God 
           the Father and Christ the Son are the same necessarily implies that 
           they also are in some way di7erent. Thus did he forge a compromise 
           between western and eastern theological positions: Christ could be, 
           and in fact had to be, both identical to and discernible from the 
           Father.
             Boethius’s  foray  into  religious  strife  showcased  his  talent  for 
           making  ancient  learning  pertinent  for  his  own  times.  Sadly,  that 
           same talent also contributed to his demise. Theodoric had enforced 
           religious toleration across his realm, allowing Jews as well as Catho-
           lics to freely practice their faiths. But now the ascension of a new 
           emperor in the east, Justin I, had given him reason to rethink his 
           policies. A.er several years of persecuting Arians in his realm, Justin 
           had  started  to  make  overtures  to  Rome,  threatening  to  upset  the 
           balance of power across the empire. In this fraught milieu, Boethius 
           made  his  brilliant  and  original  attempt  to  bridge  the  theological 
           chasm. An act of peace in any other context now menaced the Ost-
           rogoth king with the specter of a theologically united empire under 
           an upstart eastern emperor.
             Theodoric  charged  Boethius  with  treason,  sentenced  him  to 
           death, and imprisoned him in the town of Pavia to await his fate. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   212                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     213

           Unbeknownst to his executioners, by the time they arrived at his 
           prison door, Boethius had engineered a kind of escape— in spirit 
           if  not  in  the  ﬂesh.  During  his  days  of  waiting,  he  had  composed 
           another book. In it he recounted how philosophy had freed him 
           from the mortal coils of dread and despair.
              On the appointed day, the king’s men entered his cell, wrapped 
           thick wires around Boethius’s temples and eyes, and slowly tight-
           ened them as he writhed and screamed in agony. They then ﬁnished 
           the job by beating him to death with heavy wooden clubs. But as 
           darkness  fell  over  Boethius  and  the  west,  as  Europe  lost  contact 
           with the august literary traditions of the ancients, his Consolation 
           of  Philosophy  lived  on,  conveying  the  lost  treasures  of  Greek  phi-
           losophy into the modern age. Dante would place Boethius in the 
           fourth circle of heaven in his Divine Comedy; King Alfred the Great 
           in the ninth century, Geo7rey Chaucer in the fourteenth century, 
           and Queen Elizabeth I in the sixteenth century all tried their hand 
           at translating his great book.
              In his book Boethius recounts how, as he sat in his cell await-
           ing his fate, his anxiety gave way to perplexity. Would not an all- 
           knowing God know in advance every choice a mere human such as 
           himself would ever make? If so, how could he consider his choices 
           free? In what sense could he claim responsibility for having made 
           them? Trapped in this logical vortex, Boethius cries out in despera-
           tion, “There  is  no  freedom  in  human  actions  or  even  intentions.” 
           Even worse, he laments, without such freedom the very idea of jus-
           tice vanishes as well, “because to punish the wicked for what they 
           couldn’t help, or indeed to reward the good for deeds over which 
           they had no control, makes no sense at all.”1
              Today we can hear echoes of the morose musings of a condemned 
           Christian philosopher of late antiquity in the words of purported 
           rationalists who consider free will an illusion we should reject along 
           with outdated superstitions and religious beliefs. A.er recounting 
           the horriﬁc rape and murder of Jennifer Petit and her daughters by 
           two strangers in 2007, the popular atheist writer and student of neu-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   213                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           214             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           roscience Sam Harris questioned the inclination to morally judge 
           the actions of the perpetrators. “As sickening as I ﬁnd their behavior,” 
           he wrote, “I have to admit that if I were to trade places with one of 
           these men, atom for atom, I would be him: There is no extra part 
           of me that could decide to see the world di7erently or to resist the 
           impulse to victimize other people.”2 The conclusion he draws from 
           this realization is that “free will is an illusion.”3
             How curious that a fervent believer in sixth- century Italy and a 
           convinced atheist and student of brain science of the twenty- ﬁrst 
           century would seem to agree on the issue of the illusory nature of 
           free will. Except, crucially, Boethius’s account doesn’t stop there. On 
           the brink of giving up all hope, Boethius receives a visitation— not 
           from  an  angel,  but  from  a  pagan  goddess.  Philosophy,  the  con-
           demned  man’s  personiﬁed  interlocutor,  ﬂoats  through  his  dun-
           geon’s stone walls to engage him in Socratic dialogue. During those 
           brief exchanges, she reveals that his thinking su7ers from an error, 
           one that continues uncorrected in contemporary criticisms of free 
           will.
             Boethius, Philosophy  explains, assumed  that  God’s  foreknowl-
           edge  destroys  freedom  of  choice  because  he  failed  to  distinguish 
           between human knowledge, congenitally trapped in space and time, 
           and another kind of knowledge, proper only to God. If a human 
           were to see into the future, that foresight would indeed contradict 
           free will, because the things she foresees are yet to occur. But for 
           God, for whom all space and time exist as a simultaneous here and 
           now, knowledge of the future can’t involve the distinction between 
           something that has happened and something that remains to come. 
           Just as I can know it is raining right now without that knowledge 
           endowing the fact with even the slightest inevitability (it could also 
           have not rained), a godlike knowledge can know everything that has 
           happened or will happen without presuming any necessity that it 
           had to happen that way. God can know every move and every deci-
           sion I will ever make, and yet still I can choose freely.
             In  other  words,  that  we  can  imagine  a  being  who  isn’t  con-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   214                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     215

           strained by having to live from one moment to the next is utterly 
           irrelevant  to  what  in  fact  happens  in  time.  Some  things  happen 
           purely  by  necessity;  some  things  result  from  di7erent  degrees  of 
           choice.  Whether  we  presume  that  all  our  decisions  from  now  to 
           our deaths are determined because God sees all of existence, all that 
           happened, is happening, and will happen, in one eternal instant, or 
           whether we presume that all our decisions from now to our deaths 
           are determined because they stem from physical processes subject 
           to the laws of mechanical causality, amounts to the same thing. But 
           here’s  the  crucial  point:  because  they  implicitly  avoid  the  limita-
           tions of time, neither presumption undermines free choice.
              To believe that either God or the chain of causality denies free 
           will betrays an error in our thinking. It depends on the presump-
           tion that our knowledge of things equates to the things themselves, 
           as opposed to being a picture separated from what we are trying to 
           know by space and time. Indeed, Philosophy tells Boethius exactly 
           this: “Things are known not according to their natures but accord-
           ing to the nature of the one who is comprehending them.”4 Ironi-
           cally, the hard- nosed rationalists who denigrate belief in free will 
           make precisely this error.
              Like the materialist scientist expressing awe that out of billions 
           of possible people I had the luck of being born as me, those who 
           deny  free  will  can  only  do  so  at  the  cost  of  assuming  a  godlike 
           vantage neither they nor anyone else can ever occupy. When Har-
           ris asserts that if he were to trade places with one of these men he 
           would be him entirely, without any supplemental remainder able to 
           see the world di7erently, he is in fact doing precisely what he disallows: 
           positing a secret extra part of himself able to clock those di7erences 
           and report back. Just as Borges asked about the eternal return of 
           the same, “Without a special archangel to keep track, what does it 
           mean  that  we  are  going  through  the  thirteen  thousand  ﬁve  hun-
           dred and fourteenth cycle and not the ﬁrst in the series or number 
           three hundred twenty- two to the two thousandth power?” without 
           just such a special archangel, Harris’s replacement of himself with 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   215                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           216             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           another would go entirely unnoticed by himself, by the other, or by 
           anyone else in the universe, and hence his claim that he would act 
           the same way—which  is to say, that those actions are in some deep 
           sense knowable and hence necessary and unfree— is as fanciful as 
           that secret extra part of himself, that deciding soul he thinks he has 
           banished.5
             Such is the move made by all, materialists and predestinationists 
           alike, who would claim to put an end to the illusion of freedom. 
           They can make this claim only by occupying an impossible vantage, 
           a vantage unlimited by temporal and spatial perspectives. In a word, 
           they believe they can know nature itself instead of nature exposed to 
           our methods of questioning. But to occupy this vantage they must 
           forget that what is, is; that the world as we ﬁnd it must always be the 
           starting point for our investigations. Far from grasping the universe 
           as a transparent whole, we are blind, groping seekers adri. in time 
           and space. As such, free will isn’t a metaphysical implant or delu-
           sion of grandeur but an admission of our fallibility in the face of an 
           unknowable future.


           1# 4?BC, )"#$ /'$ around royal censors in Berlin by including an 
           article they had banned in one of his books. Or so he thought. As 
           it transpired, there would be serious repercussions for having dis-
           obeyed the royal decree not to intervene in matters of religious faith, 
           repercussions that would strike at the heart of Kant’s desire to live 
           his  own  life  according  to  the  principles  he  had  put  down  in  his 
           moral philosophy.
             The  conﬂict  between  Kant  and  the  Prussian  state  began  sev-
           eral years earlier, with the death of Frederick II, o.en referred to as 
           Frederick the Great, the man Kant had (somewhat sycophantically) 
           anointed as the epitome of the enlightened monarch. In his widely 
           read 1784 “Answer to the Question: What Is Enlightenment?” Kant 
           had claimed that his age, while not yet enlightened, was indeed “the 
           age  of  enlightenment,” before  adding  the  shameless  plug: “or  the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   216                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     217

           century of Frederick.” Kant based the designation in good measure 
           on Frederick’s toleration of religious diversity. Frederick, in Kant’s 
           view, was enlightened because he “considers it his duty not to pre-
           scribe anything to human beings in religious matters but to leave 
           them complete freedom . . . to make use of [their] own reason in all 
           matters of conscience.”6 Kant chose religious freedom as a kind of 
           test case, but really he wanted to defend the right of all to reason, 
           argue, and publicly express their opinions while obeying the laws of 
           the land.
              Two  years  later,  Frederick  died  without  children  and  was  suc-
           ceeded by his nephew Frederick William II. The new king exhibited 
           a good deal fewer of the traits Kant had designated as enlightened 
           than his uncle. Right o7 he replaced the previous minister for cul-
           tural and educational a7airs with a man named Johann Christoph 
           von Wöllner. The late king hadn’t thought highly of Wöllner. In fact, 
           he had called him “a swindling, scheming parson.”7 Far more con-
           cerned with religious purity than his predecessor, the new minister 
           established a board of censors in Berlin to enforce a new religious 
           edict. While declaring toleration of subjects’ religious beliefs the law 
           of the land, the new edict included a decisive caveat: “so long as each 
           quietly fulﬁlls his duties as a good citizen of the state, but keeps his 
           particular  opinion  in  every  case  to  himself, and  takes  care  not  to 
           propagate it or to convert others and cause them to err or falter in 
           their faith.”8
              Such was the political atmosphere when Kant, in clear violation 
           of the 1788 edict, decided to publish his views on religion despite 
           the o<cial censor’s explicit denial of permission. At ﬁrst, the state’s 
           reply was tepid. Kant was, a.er all, the most famous philosopher in 
           the realm. The new king had gone so far as to assign to a courtier 
           who  had  studied  with  Kant  the  charge  of  tutoring  his  own  chil-
           dren.9 But then Kant followed his ﬁrst misdemeanor with an even 
           more direct provocation.
              In June 1794 he published an essay titled “The End of All Things” 
           in which he claimed that censorship of people’s opinions directly 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   217                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           218             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           contradicted  the  essence  of  Christianity,  which  depended  on  its 
           believers freely choosing to obey. Should the laws of Christian faith 
           be supplemented by political mandate, he posed, that very core of 
           free choice would vanish, leaving behind a husk of empty compli-
           ance. Thus, Kant concluded, “it is the free way of thinking . . . from 
           which Christianity expects its teaching to be e7ective, by which it 
           has the power to win over the hearts of men to itself, men whose 
           understanding is already illuminated by the idea of the law of their 
           duty.”10  With  these  words,  plainly  accusing  the  religious  edict  of 
           damaging the cause of Christian faith, Kant had taken things too far.
             In October of the same year, Kant received his reply directly from 
           the king. Kant, the monarch said, had abused his position “for the 
           distortion and debasing of many principal and basic teachings of 
           Holy  Scripture.”11  He  would  have  to “give  at  once  a  most  consci-
           entious  account”12  of  his  actions  and  henceforth  refrain  from  all 
           such teaching and publications or “unfailingly expect, on continued 
           recalcitrance, unpleasant consequences.”13 Kant certainly knew what 
           such consequences could consist of. Having turned seventy, he was 
           in no mood to lose his university position, forgo a pension in his 
           old age, and possibly su7er banishment from the only home he had 
           ever known. That said, he had staked a very public claim as defender 
           of freedom of conscience and expression. He could hardly counte-
           nance a full-blown  “retraction and betrayal of one’s inward convic-
           tion.” And yet, he reasoned, “even if everything one says is necessarily 
           true, there is no duty to utter all truth publicly.”14
             Thus  did  Kant  come  down  ﬁrmly  on  both  sides  of  this  most 
           important question. On the one hand, he would strenuously deny 
           the primary accusations against him, that he had denigrated religion 
           and corrupted the youth. Rather, he had shown great respect for all 
           religions, chieﬂy Christianity. And he could not have corrupted any 
           youth,  since  teaching  young  people  exceeded  his  job  description 
           and he had written the works for which he had been called to order 
           as academic treatises intended for other philosophers. On the other 
           hand, he fully acknowledged and submitted to the king’s authority 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   218                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     219

           in this and all matters, and pledged “as Your Majesty’s most loyal sub-
           ject, that I will herea.er refrain altogether from discoursing publicly, 
           in lectures or writings, on religion, whether natural or revealed.”15
              It would be fair to suspect some degree of plausible deniability 
           in Kant’s answer. His insertion of the phrase “as Your Majesty’s most 
           loyal subject,” while certainly interpretable as a perfunctory honor-
           iﬁc, could also easily function in Kant’s mind as a caveat, namely, “I 
           pledge to refrain from so doing as long as I am your subject.”
              Sly caveat or not, at ﬁrst it looked as though Kant would keep 
           his word. Shortly a.er sending his response to the king, he wrote to 
           an editor who had requested a piece from him that he had indeed 
           ﬁnished a new essay on religion, but because of the censors in Berlin 
           he would refrain from publishing it. Nevertheless, although Kant 
           showed some restraint in withholding that work—which  he would 
           only publish the year a.er Frederick William’s death, hence ostensi-
           bly keeping his promise—he  plowed ahead with the publication of 
           his last great work of ethics, the long-promised  Metaphysics of Mor-
           als. And that book in no way steered clear of religious questions.
              In  its  pages  Kant  continued  the  verboten  ideas  from Religion 
           Within the Limits of Reason Alone, even citing the censored argument 
           and doubling down on it. Religious duty, he proclaimed, following 
           dictates of doctrine or tradition, should not determine the course 
           of ethical duty, which a person owes to herself, not to any external 
           force. To the extent that we at times couch our true ethical duty as 
           a duty to serve God, this is because we’ve clothed the inner, ethi-
           cal duty in the historical garb of a religion as a kind of heuristic 
           device for those cases in which “we cannot very well make obliga-
           tion (moral constraint) intuitive for ourselves.”16
              Fortunately for Kant, Frederick William II died shortly a.er the 
           publication of these words, and no o<cial response to the violation 
           of his pledge ever came. The following year Kant would also publish 
           the book he had put on hold, The Conﬂict of the Faculties, whose ﬁrst 
           part consisted of a response to the censorship that had initiated his 
           own conﬂict with royal authority. Not only, Kant declared, was he 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   219                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           220             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           justiﬁed in publishing his thoughts on religion, but it was wrong in 
           principle for the state to require a philosopher to uphold biblical 
           faith. Philosophy, which holds no political sway or actual authority 
           over people’s lives, must always be free from “the government’s com-
           mand with regard to its teachings.”17
             Kant’s conﬂict with his government during the last years of his 
           life raises questions about the concept of freedom his philosophy 
           exposited. He  had  spent  a  career  arguing  that  freedom  of  expres-
           sion  was  the  essential  political  good,  because  its  violation  would 
           amount to a negation of that core autonomy that deﬁned all ratio-
           nal beings. And yet here Kant squirmed in the vise of a dilemma. 
           When responding to the king’s injunction, did he display judicious-
           ness or cowardice? Did he undermine his own defense of the free-
           dom of expression by refraining from publishing his book until the 
           king’s  death?  Did  he  violate  his  duty  and  hence  his  autonomous 
           self- legislation by breaking his promise not to discuss religion while 
           still ostensibly His Majesty’s loyal subject? Had Kant, in other words, 
           undermined his own philosophical defense of freedom by succumb-
           ing to coercion?


           +%&# 81*:0**1#/ %09"# :%'1:& in the introductory pages to his 
           last great work on ethics, Kant writes that it “can indeed be a!ected 
           but not determined by impulses.” Freedom of choice, he continues, 
           “is this independence from being determined by sensible impulses.”18 
           Those who argue for the illusory status of free will all make some 
           version of the claim that this independence from determination by 
           sensible impulses simply doesn’t exist. We are sensible beings; we 
           react in certain ways to stimuli; and to think that we harbor some 
           agency that escapes that chain of command is mere fantasy. Indeed, 
           the data from contemporary brain science would seem to support 
           this  conclusion.  Studies  have  demonstrated  that  when  we  make 
           decisions, the neural activity accompanying the decision precedes 
           our conscious awareness of making that choice and, in some cases, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   220                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     221

           can even be detected by a third party.19 But if a scientist monitoring 
           a  PET  scan  of  our  neural  activity  can  know  what  our  decision  is 
           before we consciously decide it, doesn’t that pretty much skewer any 
           talk about freedom from impulses? Indeed, doesn’t it show that the 
           very mechanics of making a choice consists of nothing but impulses?
              In fact, such experiments tell us nothing that we couldn’t already 
           intuit, namely, that, however fast it is, making decisions takes time 
           and that our current technology may allow us to get a glimpse of that 
           activity faster than subjects can report on their own awareness of it. 
           The dystopian specter of such technology reading all the impulses 
           and  responses  of  our  entire  lives—the  implicit  extension  of  the 
           argument that the visibility of our neural processes contradicts our 
           freedom of choice— merely recycles Boethius’s concern that God’s 
           foreknowledge undermines human choice. But just as Philosophy 
           quickly extinguished that worry for Boethius, here Kant’s thought 
           should do the same.
              Boethius,  Philosophy  taught  him,  had  confused  knowability 
           with inevitability, when in fact the two have nothing to do with each 
           other. Just as my knowledge of something that just happened or is 
           happening right now confers not an iota of necessity to it, supposed 
           knowledge that something is about to happen or will happen eight 
           months from now has nothing to do with whether rational choice 
           provoked it. All of this stems from confusing decisions and occur-
           rences in time with a picture of the world from outside space and 
           time, one that implicitly incorporates all time in a single moment. 
           We fall  into  this  confusion,  as  Philosophy  explained  to  Boethius, 
           because  we  project  our  way  of  knowing  things  onto  the  things 
           themselves.
              This confusion is rampant whether you are a hard-nosed  ratio-
           nalist or a dyed-in-  the- wool deist. Harris shows this overlap when 
           he writes, “Even if you believe that every human being harbors an 
           immortal soul, the problem of responsibility remains: I cannot take 
           credit for the fact that I do not have the soul of a psychopath.”20 This 
           reasoning has a broad following. The inﬂuential British philosopher 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   221                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           222             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Galen  Strawson  ﬁnds  the  same  inﬁnite  regress  in  any  attempt  to 
           account for “how one is,” the description of that total state, mental 
           and physical, that someone is in when she makes a decision. As he 
           writes, “Ultimate responsibility for how one is is impossible, because 
           it requires the actual completion of an inﬁnite series of choices.”21 
           I cannot be responsible for any given choice I make now, because I 
           cannot be responsible for having become the person who made that 
           choice.
             Those who use the inﬁnite regress of “how I am” to argue away 
           responsibility, however, fail to grasp something that Kant saw clearly: 
           the inﬁnite regress of responsibility, just like the inﬁnite regress of 
           causality, engenders an antinomy. Whether I am what I am because 
           of my circumstances, because of my parents’ genes, or because God 
           gave me a soul at the beginning of time that was just going to turn 
           out this way, the very same arguments that lead us to refute respon-
           sibility for our actions can equally be used to support a claim of ulti-
           mate responsibility, be it of “the buck stops here” sort, where I am 
           responsible for every choice I make, or the sort that says I, God, or 
           evolution hold that responsibility. And this antinomy arises because 
           we have taken something always located in time and space, namely, 
           choices, and projected them out to the limits of time and space, as 
           if the sum total of their determinations could become an object of 
           cognition.
             The conviction that we contain an immortal soul and the con-
           viction that we are mechanistically determined represent two sides 
           of an antinomy that arises from a move common to both religious 
           zealots and materialist free- will deniers: extending judgments about 
           causality in space and time to something not sensible but intelligi-
           ble, namely, the ultimate reason someone chooses to do something. 
           We can see Strawson do this explicitly in this passage: “To be ulti-
           mately responsible for how one is, in any mental respect, one must 
           have brought it about that one is the way one is, in that respect. And 
           it’s not merely that one must have caused oneself to be the way one 
           is,  in  that  respect.  One  must  also  have  consciously  and  explicitly 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   222                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     223

           chosen to be the way one is, in that respect, and one must also have 
           succeeded  in  bringing  it  about  that  one  is  that  way.”22  While  the 
           passage o7ers a shining example of philosophical academese replete 
           with the amusing if head- scratching repetitions, the tricky work gets 
           done right at the outset, with the word “ultimately.” Since one can-
           not have brought about the way one is, one cannot be “ultimately” 
           responsible for one’s decisions. But the sleight of hand took place 
           right there, with the presumption of a total and unknowable history 
           of causes as being the sine qua non of responsibility.
              Both  sides  of  the  antinomy  imagine  an  ideal,  ultimate  cause, 
           outside  space  and  time,  as  a  precondition  for  either  assigning  or 
           denying responsibility. In an analogous way, those favoring either of 
           the anthropic answers to the question of the initial settings of the 
           universe imagine an ideal, ultimate cause, outside space and time. 
           One version imagines a conscious intent to that cause in the form 
           of God’s design, the other an inﬁnite store of real universes so as 
           to deny design. In both anthropic principles, the otherworldly sce-
           narios are invoked to avoid the embarrassment of accounting for the 
           existential fact that we ﬁnd ourselves in this universe and these are 
           the values that we derive from our measurements. Likewise, other-
           worldly scenarios to implant a free soul into a mechanistic world or 
           to deny all responsibility to human agents fall on the same strategy. 
           They create an uncaused cause outside space and time and then pre-
           tend it has real purchase on the here and now. They also do so for 
           the same reason— to avoid the embarrassment of accounting for an 
           existential fact. We are physical beings whose every move occurs in 
           the mechanistic ﬂow of space-time,  and we are rational agents who 
           can visualize options and choose which one to take.
              That free- will denial and the anthropic principle share the same 
           logic becomes clear in Harris’s counterfactual scenario of exchang-
           ing all his atoms with those of a killer. The implication of the sce-
           nario is relief, as in, “how lucky I am not to have turned out that 
           way!” Such relief makes sense if and only if the “I” in question pre-
           existed the “way” it ended up and then were thrown into a cosmic 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   223                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           224             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           lottery with a tiny chance of ending up virtuous. But the innumer-
           able  ways  I  could  have  turned  out, just  like  the  innumerable  set-
           tings that the dials of the universe could have been tuned to, result 
           from reason’s tendency to overstep its bounds, to garb its ideas with 
           the space- time fabric of its sensible reality and extend to space- time 
           measurements the eternal dignity of an ideal.
             For  Kant,  in  contrast,  free  will,  like  the  seemingly  astonishing 
           purposiveness of existence, is a necessary postulate of reason. As he 
           begins his famous discussion of free will in the Groundwork of the 
           Metaphysics of Morals, “All human beings think of themselves as hav-
           ing free will.”23 Without this postulate, there would be no way of 
           explaining counterfactual thinking, the fact that we consider oppo-
           site courses of action from those we ultimately take and then regret 
           or approve of those. In Harris’s account, Steven Hayes and Joshua 
           Komisarjevsky, the men who raped Jennifer Petit and then set her 
           house on ﬁre, murdering her and her daughters, “brieﬂy considered 
           what they should do,” before proceeding with their atrocities.24 Later, 
           Komisarjevsky professed to have been “stunned” by his actions.25
             It should be utterly clear by now that Kant’s position has noth-
           ing to do with the straw- man version of free will that the deniers 
           (rightfully)  criticize.  As  Brian  Greene  has  put  it,  “All  particle 
           motion— whether in a brain, a body, or a baseball— is controlled by 
           physics and so is fully dictated by mathematical decree. The equa-
           tions determine the state of our particles today based on their state 
           yesterday, with no opportunity for any of us to end- run the math-
           ematics  and  freely  shape,  or  mold,  or  change,  the  lawful  unfold-
           ing.”26 Indeed, for Kant, the fact that we consider and choose among 
           options coincides with the fact that our entire being, atom for atom, 
           exists in the physical world of appearance and bows to the condi-
           tions  of  causality  in  time  and  space. To put  this  in  Kant’s  words, 
           “It is equally necessary that everything which takes place should be 
           determined without exception in accordance with laws of nature.”27
             It is also crucial to add that this defense of freedom has noth-
           ing  to  do  with  some  attempts  that  have  been  made  to  use  quan-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   224                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     225

           tum  indeterminacy  as  a  reason  for  thinking  the  human  brain 
           might be exempt from the determinacy of the physical world. Max 
           Born rejected determinism in favor of a probabilistic range of out-
           comes; nothing here saves a voluntaristic notion of free will. Nor 
           does Heisenberg’s claim that our perfect knowledge of the future is 
           impossible because we cannot perfectly measure the present. Again, 
           nothing here salvages a deciding ghost in the machine. As Greene 
           writes, “Whether the laws are deterministic (as in classical physics) 
           or probabilistic (as in quantum physics) is of deep signiﬁcance to 
           how reality evolves and to the kinds of predictions science can make. 
           But for assessing free will, the distinction is irrelevant.”28
              And yet where free- will deniers err is in the absurdity of the very 
           scenarios they conjure to undermine free will and in inferring any 
           real- world consequences from those scenarios. Just as Harris imag-
           ines an atom for atom exchange with a killer, Greene posits a “super-
           human vision” capable of analyzing “everyday reality at the level of 
           its fundamental constituents”29 in order to establish the impossibil-
           ity of free will. But their conclusions overlook Kant’s fundamental 
           insight.30 Free will is not the illusion. The illusion, or delusion, is 
           that something so matter of fact, so every day, and so real as having 
           to make choices is in anyway a7ected by an impossible God’s-eye 
           view dreamed up by our most grandiose metaphysical pretensions. 
           For as Boethius learned, even God himself knowing all our actions 
           in all their unfolding has no e7ect on either our ability or our obli-
           gation to make decisions in time. When we attribute free will and 
           hence responsibility to a choice, we are doing so in response to a 
           di7erent question: not what chemical reaction or set of particle col-
           lisions led you to do something, but rather, why did you choose to do 
           this and was it the right thing to choose?
              Freedom  is  an  idea  of  reason  that  can  never  be  conﬁrmed  or 
           denied by experience. And yet we must presuppose it. For whenever 
           the arrogance of our knowledge suggests to us that we can dispense 
           with it, that we can erase the di7erence between ourselves as physi-
           cal objects in the sensible world and ourselves as deciding subjects 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   225                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           226             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           in the intelligible world, antinomy raises its bewildering head.
             In fact, like Boethius revealing that even as we identify God and 
           the Son as one, we simultaneously distinguish between them, we 
           can and must think of ourselves as physical beings determined by 
           the laws of nature and as free deciding agents at the same time, with-
           out contradiction. Only then do we see that di7erent standards and 
           di7erent questions apply when we view ourselves as objects a7ected 
           through  the  senses,  and  when  we  view  ourselves  as  intelligences 
           who need to make decisions in the world, and that to say we are 
           both “contains not the least contradiction.”31
             As  Kant  considered  the  consequences  of  violating  the  king’s 
           edict,  he  knew  he  would  have  to  account  for  his  decision  before 
           the court of his own moral judgment. He knew that he could act in 
           accordance with his duty as a free, self-legislating  rational being, or 
           in violation of it. But there was something else he knew. The con-
           straints that bind our freedom as political subjects do not extend to 
           the freedom of our will. We may experience greater or lesser free-
           dom to pursue our desires and inclinations in di7erent settings and 
           under  di7erent  political  regimes.  None  of  this,  however,  changes 
           our basic moral constitution. Kant could choose to obey the king or 
           choose to defy him. He could fear the outcome of his decision. But 
           whether he obeyed or rebelled, whether he conformed to pressure 
           or risked the king’s displeasure, both would be the actions of a free 
           will.


           1# /"(-1&2 /"-:K" 9L-D0&A’* renowned novel One Hundred Years 
           of Solitude, the town of Macondo receives a visit from a woman called, 
           appropriately, Visitación. Unbeknownst to the town’s inhabitants, 
           she brings with her a plague. As the plague spreads, the townspeople 
           ﬁrst lose their ability to sleep; they fritter away countless wakeful 
           hours on repetitive games in the vain hope that their boredom will 
           lull them into a long- desired slumber. But a far worse scourge fol-
           lows on the heels of insomnia. Soon the villagers realize they have 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   226                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     227

           started to forget the identity of the objects around them. Faced with 
           the  prospect  of  a  total  memory  collapse,  they  begin  to  label  the 
           things they come into everyday contact with, reminding themselves 
           of their purpose. On one animal they pin a sign that reads, “This is 
           a cow.” Soon they realize they have no idea what to do with a cow, 
           so they add another note elaborating, “You milk her.” Because they 
           don’t know what to do with the milk, a further clariﬁcation is called 
           for. “You mix it with co7ee and make co7ee with milk.” Toward the 
           nadir of this regressive spiral, signs start popping up reminding the 
           villagers that “God exists.” As the narrator explains, “In that way they 
           continued to live a si.ing reality, momentarily captured by words, 
           but that was to ﬂee irremediably when they forgot the meaning of 
           the written letters.”32
              It is one of the sad ironies of intellectual history that as he entered 
           the last years of his life, one of the most capacious intellects of all 
           time would su7er a fate similar to that of the residents of García 
           Márquez’s ﬁctional town.
              By 1796, at seventy- two years old, Kant reported having to refrain 
           from lecturing, “because of age and indisposition.”33 Still, his morn-
           ing routine continued as before. Up at 5:00 a.m., two cups of strong 
           tea,  a  pipeful  of  tobacco.  Kant  liked  this  time  very  much,  telling 
           a visiting friend it was “one of my happiest times. Then I am not 
           yet strained, and I try gradually to collect myself, and in the end it 
           becomes clear what and how I will spend my day.”34
              Not  burdened  by  lecturing  and  administration,  Kant  would 
           spend much of those days trying to complete the ambitious portfolio 
           of philosophical projects he had laid out for himself. He published 
           The  Metaphysics  of  Morals  in  1797  and The  Conﬂict  of  the  Faculties 
           the following year, along with a collection of his edited lectures on 
           anthropology. In his own mind, Kant was primarily at work on his 
           crowning  oeuvre, a  book  that  would  tie  his  system  together  into 
           one expansive package. Given the diminished state of his intellec-
           tual powers, no one expected it would turn into much. As a friend 
           of his wrote, “I do not believe that he will live to see the end. It can-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   227                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           228             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           not be published as is under any circumstances.”35 His good friend 
           Kraus was even more pessimistic, later saying of “the last scribblings 
           over  which  Kant  died” that “no  sense  or  understanding  wants  to 
           enter into them.”36
             Kant’s physical and mental decline hung out like knickers on 
           a  line  for  all  to  see.  He  still  took  his  daily  strolls.  But  now  frail 
           and afraid of falling, he developed a curious style of walking that 
           involved stamping ﬂat- footed, which he believed would help keep 
           him stable. It didn’t. He soon enough fell, and shortly a.er his acci-
           dent stopped going on walks altogether. As he trundled around his 
           house, his short- term recall began to fail him. So, like the residents 
           of  Macondo,  he  started  writing  notes  to  remind  himself  of  basic 
           things. As a friend recalled, “In the end he wrote down every little 
           detail that others told him or that came to him.”37
             Kant’s notes to himself display a mind adri. in an undi7eren-
           tiated morass of memory and perception, a mind using words to 
           momentarily  capture  a  rapidly  si.ing  reality.  One  note  remarks 
           that his students should avoid blowing their noses and coughing. 
           Another insists that the word we use for “footprint” is wrong. Still 
           another reads, “Nitrogen azote is the basis of nitrate and has acidic 
           powers.”38 For some reason Kant needed to remind himself about 
           the downy ﬂu7 found under the winter coat of angora sheep and 
           even some pigs.
             Kant’s  friend  and  executor  Ehregott  Wasianski,  who  dutifully 
           gathered and compiled these notes, eventually supplied the philoso-
           pher with notebooks to carry with him so that he could dispense 
           with the errant pieces of paper that ﬂooded his residence. Wasianski 
           would also arrive to rescue Kant when he lay in a helpless puddle 
           beside  his  chair  a.er  slipping  o7  it  while  reading.  He  eventually 
           insisted Kant keep a glass of water next to that reading chair. Not to 
           drink, but to put out the ﬂames that three times had already jumped 
           from his candle to his nightcap, risking life and house.39 On Febru-
           ary 11, 1804, Wasianski mixed water and wine together and gave it to 
           his friend and mentor. Es ist gut, Kant muttered. “I’ve had enough.”40 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   228                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                    Free Will                     229

           His last words.
              The loss of memory that comes to some with old age or, more 
           acutely, what we now recognize as a severe brain ailment, Alzheim-
           er’s disease, is a cruelty beyond measure for any rational being. That 
           Kant’s philosophy did more than any other to focus attention on 
           the essence of rationality only highlights that cruelty. As he aged 
           and lost his memory, Kant lost his ability to connect and systematize 
           impressions. He lost, in other words, the very faculty that, according 
           to his own philosophy, permits us to synthesize the manifold of sen-
           sible input under concepts and makes sense of the world. Strangely, 
           in losing his memory, Kant was slowly approximating the world as 
           experienced by another, ﬁctional man— one who su7ered from an 
           inability not to remember but to forget.
              Like Funes, Kant in his last years had lost his ability to abstract 
           from his absorption in the world. Memories failed to distinguish 
           themselves  from  current  input.  With  his  perfect  memory,  Funes 
           su7ered from the same shortcoming. “He had e7ortlessly learned 
           English, French, Portuguese, Latin,” Borges writes. “I suspect, never-
           theless, that he was not very good at thinking. To think is to ignore 
           (or  forget)  di7erences,  to  generalize,  to  abstract.”41  Likewise  Kant, 
           the great thinker, had, in Wasianski’s words, “stopped thinking.”42
              Perfect  memory  could  also  become  a  disability,  as  Alexander 
           Luria realized in the case of Solomon Shereshevsky, whose brain, he 
           wrote, was “lacking . . . the capacity to convert encounters with the 
           particular into instances of the general.”43 Indeed, at their extremes, 
           perfect memory and total forgetting would converge; the result, a 
           being adri. in the here and now, with no ability to synthesize dispa-
           rate impressions into a ﬂow of time, a fabric of space. Such a being, 
           perhaps  moving  through  the  world  by  instinct,  perhaps  driven 
           exclusively by mechanistic impulses, would also lack the capacity of 
           reﬂection that Kant identiﬁed as the very heart of practical reason. 
           A being that lacks free will. Indeed, in this regard the same could be 
           said of a stone or a god. For facing a choice and not knowing which 
           option one should or will take doesn’t just involve freedom; that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   229                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           230             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           moment of indecision, of abstraction from total saturation in the 
           ﬂow of impressions, is freedom. This much Kant had seen before 
           time and age smothered him in the blanket of the world. To reason 
           is to be free. There is no way around it.
             Kant believed that humans, like every other being that appears 
           in nature, ﬂow with the causal mechanisms of the laws of physics. 
           At  the  same  time,  a  minimal  abstraction  from  absorption  in  the 
           natural world endowed those same beings with freedom, with the 
           ability and even the necessity of seeing themselves in that world, 
           deciding on a course of action, and judging their choice. The bril-
           liance of Kant was to see what others did not and have since forgot-
           ten: that the horns of this dilemma come into contradiction only 
           if  we  presuppose  something  false  about  the  world,  if  we  believe 
           that the space- time continuum— in which we experience the world 
           and decide among our options— constitutes the ultimate nature of 
           reality.
             As Borges would show, and as we explore in the next chapter, 
           failure to grasp this point would lead humanity into the greatest 
           extravagances of thought and the deepest paradoxes of the imagi-
           nation. As Heisenberg would discover, even as his fellow scientists 
           would continue to prefer any ﬂight of fancy over accepting this fact, 
           there is no way to extirpate the moment of choice from our knowl-
           edge of the world; observation inserts freedom into nature; we are, 
           and ever will be, active participants in the universe we discover.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   230                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                                      11

                           FORKING PATHS


                 '-  "22 1$* "*$'#1*%1#/, mind- bending  complexity— for 
                 all its blurry cats, entangled particles, buckyballs, and Bell’s 
          Finequalities— quantum mechanics ultimately boils down to 
           one core mystery. This mystery found its best expression in the let-
           ter Heisenberg wrote to Pauli in the fevered throes of his discovery. 
           The path a particle takes “only comes into existence through this, 
           that we observe it.” This single, stunning expression underlies all the 
           rest: the wave/particle duality (interference patterns emerge when 
           the particles have not yet been observed and hence their possible 
           paths  interfere  with  one  another);  the  apparently  absurd  liminal 
           state of Schrödinger’s cat (the cat seems to remain blurred between 
           life and death because atoms don’t release a particle until observed); 
           the  temporal  paradox  (observing  a  particle  seems  to  retroactively 
           determine the path it chose to get here); and, the one that really got 
           to Einstein, if the observation of a particle at one place and time 
           instantaneously  changes  something  about  the  rest  of  reality, then 
           locality, the cornerstone of relativity and guarantee that the laws of 
           physics are invariable through the universe, vanishes like fog on a 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   231                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           232             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           warming windowpane.
             If  the  act  of  observation  somehow  instantaneously  conjures  a 
           particle’s path, the foundations not only of classical physics but also 
           of what we widely regard as physical reality crumble before our eyes. 
           This fact explains why Einstein held fast to another interpretation. 
           The particle’s path doesn’t come into existence when we observe it. 
           The path exists, but we just can’t see it. Like the parable of the ball 
           in the box he described in his letter to Schrödinger, a 50 percent 
           chance of ﬁnding a ball in any one of two boxes does not complete 
           the description of the ball’s reality before we open the box. It merely 
           states our lack of knowledge about the ball’s whereabouts.
             And  yet,  as  experiment  a.er  experiment  has  proven,  the  balls 
           simply aren’t there before the observation. We can separate entan-
           gled  particles,  seemingly  to  any  conceivable  distance,  and  by 
           observing one simultaneously come to know something about the 
           other— something that wasn’t the case until the exact moment of observ-
           ing it. Like the beer and whiskey twins, we can maintain total ran-
           domness up to a nanosecond before one of them orders, and still 
           what the one decides to order will determine the other’s drink, on 
           the spot, even light- years away.
             The  ineluctable  fact  of  entanglement  tells  us  something  pro-
           found about reality and our relation to it. Imagine you are one of 
           the twins about to order a drink (this should be more imaginable 
           than being an entangled particle about to be observed, but the idea 
           is the same). From your perspective you can order either a whiskey 
           or a beer: it’s a ﬁ.y- ﬁ.y choice; nothing is forcing your hand. Unbe-
           knownst to you, however, in a galaxy far, far away, your twin has just 
           made the choice for you. Your twin can’t tell you this or signal it in 
           any way, but what you perceive to be a perfectly random set of pos-
           sibilities, an open choice, is entirely constrained. You have no idea if 
           you will order beer or whiskey, but when you order it, it will be the 
           one or the other all the same. If your twin is, say, one light-year  away, 
           the time in which you make this decision doesn’t even exist over 
           there yet. Any signals your sibling gets from you, or any signals you 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   232                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   233

           send, will take another year to arrive. And still, as of this moment, 
           you each know. Neither will get conﬁrmation for another year, but 
           you can be conﬁdent, you can bet your life’s savings on it— a ran-
           dom coin toss in another galaxy, and you already know the outcome.
              The  riddles  that  arise  from  Heisenberg’s  starting  point  would 
           seem to constitute the most vital questions of existence. And yet one 
           of the curious side e7ects of quantum mechanics’ extraordinary suc-
           cess has been a kind of quietism in the face of those very questions. 
           The  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics, deciding  what  all  this 
           means, has tended to go unnoticed by serious physics departments 
           and the granting agencies that support them in favor of the “shut 
           up and calculate” school, leading the former to take hold mainly in 
           philosophy departments, as a subﬁeld of the philosophy of science 
           called foundations of physics. Nevertheless, despite such siloing, a 
           few physicists persisted in exploring possible solutions to the quan-
           tum riddles. Some of their ideas have been literally otherworldly.
              In the 1950s, a small group of graduate students working with 
           John Wheeler at Princeton University became fascinated with these 
           problems  and  kept  returning  to  them  in  late- night,  sherry- fueled 
           rap sessions.1 Chief among this group was Hugh Everett III, a young 
           man with classic 1950s-style  nerd glasses and a looming forehead. 
           Everett found himself chaﬁng at the growing no- question zone that 
           proponents  of  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  had  built  around 
           their science. Why should we accept that in one quantum reality, 
           observations somehow cause nature to take shape out of a probabi-
           listic range of options, whereas on this side of some arbitrary line in 
           the sand we inhabit a di7erent, classical reality where observations 
           meekly bow to the world out there? What exactly determines when 
           this change takes place? “Let me mention a few more irritating fea-
           tures of the Copenhagen Interpretation,” Everett would write to its 
           proponents: “You talk of the massiveness of macro systems allowing 
           one to neglect further quantum e7ects . . . but never give any justiﬁ-
           cation for this ﬂatly asserted dogma.”2
              Everett  wrote  those  words  to  defend—futilely,   it  would  turn 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   233                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           234             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           out— his own interpretation, one he had started to dream up dur-
           ing those late-night  symposia. What if our assumptions about what 
           happens when we perform a measurement on a quantum event are 
           just wrong? What if it’s not the case that the particle was everywhere 
           at once and then suddenly in one place, just because we measured 
           it to be there? Imagine that what an observation does is not retro-
           actively send a ball into a box depending on where it was observed, 
           but instead creates two entirely separate universes, one in which the 
           observer ﬁnds a ball and the other in which there is no ball in the 
           box. In such a scenario it would seem to the observers that they had 
           caused the ball to materialize retroactively by observing it, or caused 
           a  blurred  ball  to  decide  where  to  be,  but  in  the  world  they  now 
           inhabit, no such magic is required. Depending on their world, the 
           ball was either always in that box or always not.
             If that were the case, Everett speculated, the apparent paradoxes 
           of the quantum world disappear. Observations don’t retroactively 
           determine paths and have superluminal e7ects; cats are not both 
           alive and dead. Rather, observations entail new entanglements that 
           then exclude a host of other possibilities, e7ectively creating a dif-
           ferent world. When we see one twin order a beer, she doesn’t cause 
           the other to order a whiskey. Rather, our observation of her ordering 
           that beer decides what world we are in, namely, the one where this 
           twin had beer and the other had whiskey. The other world, where 
           this twin ordered whiskey and her sister beer, still exists, but it has 
           forever escaped our grasp.
             The same can be said of Schrödinger’s cat and Einstein’s ball in 
           the box. It’s not that our observation resolved a blurry cat or that 
           half balls waited for us to open the box before turning into whole 
           balls. Rather, our observation merely entangles us in such a way that 
           we now deﬁnitively inhabit a world in which the cat is alive, the 
           ball is here, and those other options have slammed the door on us 
           forever.
             When we make our observation and become so entangled, the 
           world that peels o7 from our own becomes like a ghost world to 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   234                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   235

           ours, one that has, as the physicist Sean Carroll, one of Everett’s most 
           prominent contemporary adherents, puts it, “absolutely no bearing 
           on what happens in our world.”3 Of course, we’ve seen ghosts in this 
           story before. The electrons we don’t detect, but somehow still man-
           age to interfere with each other in the two- slit experiment. Except 
           in Everett’s interpretation, all those possible interactions between 
           wavelike particles vanish and cease to have bearing on our world 
           once a particle has become entangled with one of our devices. Our 
           world, our device, the particle, and we have branched o7 into a sepa-
           rate existence; we can no longer see the results of all that wavelike 
           interference; the pattern disappears.
              In 1957, a disgruntled Everett handed in a much- redacted ver-
           sion of his ideas as his doctoral thesis and then le. academia to take 
           a job with the U.S. Department of Defense. Unbeknownst to him, 
           a decade earlier a story appeared in the genre journal Ellery Queen’s 
           Mystery  Magazine.4  It  was  the  ﬁrst  translation  into  English  of  an 
           Argentine writer who was still largely unknown in the United States. 
           He had published it in 1941 as the title tale in his ﬁrst landmark col-
           lection. It had drawn positive comments from critics because, unlike 
           so many of his other stories, it actually contained a plot. What no 
           one could know at the time was that, with “The Garden of Forking 
           Paths,” Borges had previewed, almost verbatim, Everett’s solution to 
           the mysteries of quantum mechanics.


           ('-/&* (&/1#* %1* *!, story in a typical way— for him: a snippet of 
           text in a history book, an overlooked mystery, some missing pages. 
           In what remains of the text, a certain Yu Tsun relates his shock at 
           recognizing  a  voice  on  the  phone:  a  captain  in  the  English  army 
           named Richard Madden. Madden is a notorious spy hunter, a blood-
           hound on the scent of Prussian agents in England, where Yu Tsun 
           works and lives. Yu Tsun is just such an agent. When he hangs up the 
           phone, the clock has started to count down the hours and minutes 
           of his life. Madden knows he is here, and nothing stops Madden.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   235                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           236             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             Yu Tsun has one card le. to play. He knows the location where 
           the British have installed a new artillery park. If he can get this infor-
           mation to his German leaders in the next few hours, he will at least 
           draw some of the enemy’s blood before Madden cuts him down. In 
           a few minutes and with the help of a telephone book, he conceives 
           of a plan. To complete it, he needs to ﬁnd a man named Stephen 
           Albert.
             As  Yu  Tsun  races  against  Richard  Madden  to  reach  the  town 
           where Albert lives, he reﬂects on his ancestor Ts’ui Pen, a governor 
           in Yunnan who stepped out of the public eye to write a novel and 
           build a labyrinth. A.er thirteen years working in solitude, Ts’ui Pen 
           was  murdered.  His  novel  was  massive  and  incomprehensible,  his 
           labyrinth never found. When Yu Tsun ﬁnally arrives at the gate to 
           Stephen Albert’s house, he is astonished to ﬁnd out that Albert is a 
           sinologist who has reconstructed the work of his ancestor Ts’ui Pen, 
           the famed yet never recovered Garden of Forking Paths.
             In the scant hour he reckons he has before Madden tracks him 
           down, Yu Tsun learns from Stephen Albert that the labyrinth Ts’ui 
           Pen set out to build and the incomprehensible novel he le. behind 
           are, in fact, one and the same thing. Ts’ui Pen’s novel is a labyrinth 
           in time. In life as in most ﬁctions, characters who face “diverse alter-
           natives” must choose one and eliminate the others; in Ts’ui Pen’s 
           textual garden, in contrast, they simultaneously choose all of them, 
           creating “an inﬁnite series of times, a growing, dizzying web of diver-
           gent, convergent, and parallel times,” a fabric of times that “contains 
           all possibilities.”5
             As he listens to Albert, Yu Tsun feels around and within him “an 
           invisible, intangible pullulation.”6 He senses that the house is “satu-
           rated, inﬁnitely, with invisible persons,” other versions of Albert and 
           himself “in other dimensions of time.”7 His reverie fades away at the 
           arrival of Madden. Quietly, resolutely, Yu Tsun kills Albert, the man 
           he had come to revere in the short time he knew him. He had found 
           in the pages of the phone book a listing for a man whose last name 
           was that of the town where the artillery barrage lies in wait. The 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   236                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   237

           news of that man’s murder by a Chinese resident of England will 
           give the Prussian command the information they need to attack the 
           park and set back the British advance.
              Captured by Madden, he is sentenced to hang while the Prus-
           sian army successfully stalls the British advance by a few paltry days. 
           Le. to face a fate he now longs for, Yu Tsun reﬂects how the very 
           leaders he aided cannot know, because no one can know, his endless 
           contrition.8
              If Borges remained virtually unknown during the years that Ever-
           ett worked up his many-worlds  interpretation of quantum mechan-
           ics, a few years later this would decisively change. In 1961 a group 
           of major publishing houses in Europe and New York came together 
           to create the International Publishers’ Prize, which came with a cash 
           award  of  ten  thousand  dollars  and  translation  deals  with  each  of 
           the presses involved. A.er much toggling among the six committees 
           established to choose a winner, the judges opted for both ﬁnalists, 
           Samuel Beckett and Jorge Luis Borges. Borges was at Bioy’s house 
           for Sunday breakfast when the call came. Naturally, he hadn’t heard 
           of the prize and thought it was a prank.9 Within a very short time, 
           this obscure writer of genre literature from deep in the Southern 
           Cone became a household name.
              While  the  Publishers’ Prize  lit  the  fuse,  it  had  been  fueled  by 
           growing enthusiasm for his work in France over the prior decade. 
           The famous critic Roger Caillois had translated a collection of his 
           stories under the title Labyrinthes, and the same year a review of his 
           Ficciones appeared in Jean- Paul Sartre’s journal Les Temps Modernes. 
           Translations quickly followed in Germany, Italy, and Spain, where 
           the publisher of the leading press Seix Barral proposed Borges for 
           the Publishers’ Prize, noting his inﬂuence on the generation of writ-
           ers emerging from Latin America, such as Gabriel García Márquez 
           and  Mario  Vargas  Llosa,  who  themselves  were  taking  the  literary 
           world by storm.
              While his work had not yet begun to be widely translated in the 
           English- speaking  world,  in  1961  Borges  would  receive  his  ﬁrst  of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   237                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           238             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           countless invitations to travel to the States to lecture and serve as 
           guest professor. This time his gig was with the University of Texas 
           at  Austin,  but  during  the  six  months  of  his  stay,  accompanied  as 
           usual by his mother, he made pilgrimages to the homes of writers 
           he  admired:  Longfellow’s  mansion  in  Cambridge  and  Emerson’s 
           house in Concord. He would continue the practice in his many trav-
           els to come.10 When he visited Johns Hopkins and Baltimore toward 
           the end of his life, the philosopher Stephen Vicchio, then a graduate 
           student, took him downtown to the grave of Edgar Allan Poe. The 
           blind man stood in rapt contemplation as he caressed the contours 
           of the statue’s face. “This is the Poe I know,” he whispered.11
             Back at home in Buenos Aires, Borges had become Argentina’s 
           most famous native son. The days of a long commute by tram to a 
           municipal library were long gone. Now he held the prestigious post 
           of director of the National Library and a chair in literature at the 
           University of Buenos Aires. He had received literary knighthoods 
           from France, England, and Italy. Harvard University named him its 
           Charles Eliot Norton Professor of Poetry for the 1967–68  academic 
           year. In short, shy Georgie had become a big deal.
             The allure of international travel came with some challenges for 
           a blind, absurdly impractical man in his late sixties. For some time, 
           Borges’s mother had served admirably as his travel companion and 
           guide. But as she had turned ninety, the specter was rising of a time 
           when Borges could no longer rely on her to play that essential role. 
           And thus did the issue of marriage rise with it, though not for the 
           romantic reasons Borges had always dreamed of. Rather than creat-
           ing  a  barrier  to  her  son’s  eventual  match, Leonor  led  the  charge, 
           pushing her Georgie to get in touch with Elsa Astete, a woman he 
           had  known  and  brieﬂy  wooed  in  his  twenties  who  had  recently 
           been widowed.
             Borges vacillated. He had in the meantime developed another of 
           his poetic crushes, this time on a student named María Kodama, the 
           daughter of a Japanese businessman who had attended his courses 
           at the university. But Kodama was far too young for Borges, even for 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   238                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   239

           a time when relations between aging professors and young students 
           didn’t raise the eyebrows they do today. So, he put aside his fantasies 
           and eventually made a choice. He proposed to Elsa in the summer of 
           1967. She accepted, and in the same year they were married, ﬁrst in a 
           civil ceremony and shortly therea.er in church, only a week before 
           the planned departure for Harvard. The plan of a small, private cer-
           emony quickly succumbed as the press, having caught wind of the 
           impending wedding, thronged the church, stretching their necks to 
           catch glimpses and photos of the most famous man in Argentina 
           ﬁnally tying the knot.12
              The troubles in Borges’s marriage started almost as soon as the 
           wedding bells stopped ringing. Stressed over the preparations for 
           their impending voyage, Elsa failed to show up at the party Leonor 
           threw  for  the  newlyweds.  Once  they  arrived  in  Cambridge,  she 
           complained about the apartment Harvard had rented for them and 
           insisted on changing addresses. Knowing only Spanish, she felt out of 
           sorts in Borges’s literary and academic orbits, and quickly retreated 
           from view. Though the marriage had always been conceived in prac-
           tical  terms  as  a  way  of  placing  a  caretaker  in  Borges’s  life, in  the 
           end Harvard assigned a graduate student to guide the aging poet to 
           his lectures.13 Back in Buenos Aires a.er the visiting professorship, 
           things didn’t improve. Elsa felt as much out of place in the literary 
           circles at home as she had among the professors at Harvard. The 
           upper- crust ladies in Leonor’s own social circles looked down on 
           her provinciality as well, and she eventually retreated from Buenos 
           Aires social life altogether.
              By 1969 the situation had become close to unbearable for Borges, 
           who confessed to a friend his desire to leave his wife. When asked if 
           he had informed Elsa of his intentions, however, he demurred, cit-
           ing his dislike of conﬂict. In May of that year, he ﬁnally consulted 
           with a lawyer, again unbeknownst to his wife, and worked out the 
           steps toward a legal separation—in  secret. So it was that in July, her 
           husband ostensibly on a trip but in truth hiding from her to avoid a 
           scene, Elsa opened the door of her apartment to a lawyer presenting 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   239                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           240             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           her with Borges’s application for separation. She accepted and kept 
           the apartment. Borges went back to his mother.14


           1# " *&#*&, $%& cowardice exhibited by Borges in the face of a con-
           frontation with his wife seems out of character. Where was the iras-
           cible adventurer who risked his own and his friends’ lives insulting 
           roughnecks in the back streets of shady neighborhoods? Where was 
           the inveterate verbal brawler who faced down the changing political 
           winds bringing fascism to his country in the 1940s? In fact, if Borges 
           erred on the side of timidity in a7airs of the heart, in public life his 
           stridency would prove the most destructive.
             Abhorrence for fascism had long guided the course of Borges’s 
           politics. In 1939, as the war broke out in Europe, he had written that 
           victory for Germany would lead to the “ruin and degradation of the 
           entire globe” and called for the “annihilation of Adolf Hitler.”15 Four 
           years  later  he  reacted  with  deﬁance  to  the  rise  of  Juan  Domingo 
           Perón, the charismatic leader of the military coup that brought the 
           nationalists to power in Argentina. In 1945, at the celebratory din-
           ner for his award of the Grand Prize of literature by the Argentine 
           Society  of  Writers,  he  stood  to  speak  and  lambasted  the  military 
           leaders and the Nazi ideology they admired in Europe, calling it a 
           perverse sect.16
             Now, some thirty years later, Borges would have a chance to dou-
           ble down on those impulses. In 1970 a group of Peronists started 
           an armed rebellion against the Argentine state. One of their early 
           actions was the kidnapping and murder of a general who had played 
           a part in Perón’s downfall and exile some ﬁ.een years earlier. As 
           the reigning junta scrambled to compose a sense of order, negotia-
           tions began with the Peronists that, it was rumored, might lead to 
           the return of Perón himself. Outraged, Borges joined a group call-
           ing itself the Committee for the Promotion of Civic Involvement 
           in Support of the Republic and released a statement calling Perón’s 
           Argentina a “vernacular imitation of fascism.”17


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   240                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   241

              Despite his e7orts, two years later the Peronists took the presi-
           dency, setting the stage for Perón’s return from Spain. Contemptu-
           ous as ever, Borges remarked in an interview with the Italian press 
           that his party had won because of the votes of “six million idiots.”18 
           Perón, for his part, when asked about Borges’s invectives, was cir-
           cumspect, saying, “If we put up with him for ten years when we were 
           in government, there is all the more reason to do so now that he is 
           an old man.”19
              As it turned out, the government went to considerable lengths 
           not to appear to be persecuting the old man. When rumors circu-
           lated that Borges was considering resigning from his post as director 
           of the National Library, o<cials rushed to assure him that they had 
           no intention to interfere with his work there. Undeterred, Borges 
           resigned. Soon therea.er Perón did return, winning election to the 
           presidency in a landslide. It turned out that calling Borges old had 
           been a classic case of calling the kettle black. Several years Borges’s 
           senior, Perón died less than a year a.er taking o<ce, leaving a power 
           vacuum in his wake that quickly devolved into political chaos.
              In the wake of Perón’s death and the subsequent power vacuum, 
           a new military junta took control under the leadership of one Gen-
           eral Jorge Videla. Back in Buenos Aires a.er another international 
           trip, Borges accepted a lunch invitation from the general, at which 
           he praised him for “what he had done for the patria, having saved 
           it from chaos, from the abject state we were in, and, above all, from 
           idiocy.”20 Shortly a.er his lunch with Videla, he was invited to Chile 
           to receive an honorary degree. Chile’s dictator, Augusto Pinochet, 
           had deposed the democratically elected Salvador Allende’s govern-
           ment in a violent coup that resulted in the president’s assassination. 
           Warned not to accept by friends who were concerned that showing 
           support for a pariah regime like that of Pinochet would scuttle his 
           chances of winning the Nobel Prize that year, Borges was deﬁant, 
           telling them that their very admonitions now obliged him to go.21 
           Not only did he leave for Santiago, but he also dined in private with 
           Pinochet, who personally knighted him with Chile’s highest honor. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   241                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           242             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           True to  his  friends’ fears,  such  public  endorsement  of  one  of  the 
           world’s  most  notorious  human  rights  abusers  would  ensure  that 
           Borges would never receive the world’s highest literary honor.


           $%& 19"/& '3 3'-)1#/ paths or roads is a powerful one. We are 
           drawn  to  imagining  time  as  a  line,  a  path  we  travel  down,  with 
           moments of bifurcating decisions forcing us to choose between dif-
           ferent futures. When, in Robert Frost’s evocative image, two roads 
           diverge in a wood, we tend to conjure alternative presents for our-
           selves. In Frost’s famous poem, the walker laments that he “could 
           not travel both / And be one traveler,” and decides to keep “the ﬁrst 
           for another day.” Yet he also grasps, knowing how “way leads on to 
           way,” that he will most likely never come back for it.22
             Early in his life Borges had gravitated to such images and noted 
           that realizing one set of possibilities in life “would have excluded 
           or put o7 the others.”23 What if the ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life had 
           taken a di7erent turn? What if he hadn’t bowed to the pressure to 
           marry a woman he didn’t love? What if he had been more circum-
           spect about endorsing generals who would turn out to be torturers, 
           killers, war criminals?
             For all his headstrong, even petty contrariness, Borges could show 
           humility when the circumstances demanded it. In 1980, the track 
           record long clear, he expressed sincere regret for his prior political 
           stances. In Spain to receive the Cervantes Prize, he was questioned 
           by  the  press  on  his  support  of  the  generals  and  their  now  well- 
           known Dirty War. Back in Argentina he would say that the Span-
           ish reporters “interrogated me a good deal,” that “they also taught 
           me a lot.”24 An old acquaintance who regularly protested the disap-
           pearance of her daughter with the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo—a  
           group of women who lost children and grandchildren to the Dirty 
           War— visited  him  in  his  apartment.  As  she  would  later  report, 
           “Borges listened to me very carefully and with great respect . . . and 
           he was able to get a sense of the full extent of a mother’s grief.”25 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   242                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   243

           Later that year Borges would sign the ﬁrst of several open letters 
           decrying the fate of the disappeared. He could call for an “investi-
           gation into the economic ruin, the disappearances, the war.”26 He 
           called Argentina a land of “wise but desperate people in the hands 
           of madmen.”27 The shi. in his public position quickly resulted in a 
           change in the military government’s treatment of him. Copies of an 
           interview he did in Newsweek were banned in Argentina; the nation-
           alist paper excoriated him with a headline accusing him of being a 
           “grotesque traitor.”28
              But while he could feel regret and change his position, he could 
           not go back and take that other path. It’s hard not to read in “The 
           Garden of Forking Paths” a philosophical rumination on precisely 
           that mode of regret. Yu Tsun senses the pullulation of invisible, com-
           peting  versions  of  himself— all those  roads  not  taken  because  we 
           cannot travel both and be one traveler. But what if we could?
              To reﬂect on a past decision, a fork in the road, a road not taken, 
           may occasion regret. It may occasion remorse. These feelings reﬂect 
           personal responsibility. They imply freedom: I could have chosen 
           otherwise. But if at every fork in the road we travel both roads, what 
           does that entail for freedom, for responsibility? Faced with an invi-
           tation from a controversial dictator in Chile, Borges had a decision 
           to make. His friends counseled him not to go. He would ruin his 
           chances to win the Nobel Prize. They were right, but their arguments 
           backﬁred. Borges found such bet hedging execrable and decided to 
           accept. In the universe described by Ts’ui Pen’s novel, Borges also 
           declines  the  invitation.  That  Borges  decries  human  rights  abuses 
           from early on. And yes, that Borges wins the Nobel Prize for Litera-
           ture. But— and here’s the crucial point— if Borges takes both roads, 
           would either Borges be responsible for that choice?
              Clearly the answer is no. If having taken a tough decision results 
           merely from a previous version of you not deciding at all, but rather 
           spawning two versions of yourself, then neither of those versions 
           chose freely and neither can claim responsibility or credit for the 
           outcome. To live in the Garden of Forking Paths is to cease to be a 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   243                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           244             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           rational agent at all, since all possibilities are taken by all actors, and 
           any one of us at any time embodies the reality of one path, itself 
           soon to bifurcate again.
             This  imaginary  situation  relates  to  the  thought  experiment  of 
           the  entangled  twins.  In  that  case,  each  twin  will  believe  she  has 
           made a free choice. If one chooses whiskey and later gets a hangover, 
           that one may feel responsible for the choice, and perhaps regret it. 
           But that regret, that feeling of responsibility, will be misplaced. For 
           if the one’s order of whiskey was required by the other’s simulta-
           neous order of beer, even light- years away and with no possibility 
           of communication between the two of them, in what sense was the 
           decision a free one?
             The  scenario  is  repeated  in  Sam  Harris’s  fanciful  musing  of 
           replacing himself, atom for atom, with the person of a killer and 
           then denying the existence of an extra part of him “that could . . . 
           resist the impulse to victimize other people.”29 In fact, just like in 
           that case, each of these scenarios that appears to deny us any agency is 
           misleading,  because  it  depends  on  an  impossible  presupposition  about 
           knowledge.
             Just  as  Boethius  realized  in  his  prison  cell,  a  millennium  and 
           a half before Borges dreamed his garden and Everett conjured his 
           many- worlds  solution  to  the  measurement  problem  of  quantum 
           mechanics, timeless knowledge can never obliterate choice, because 
           choice takes place in time. Entanglement is real, but its reality says 
           absolutely nothing about the randomness of what a measurement 
           reveals  or,  for  that  matter,  about  freedom.  While  it  is  undeniably 
           true that the measurement of one entangled particle’s spin decides 
           that of the other, that information can never be communicated in 
           time for the new measurement to be a7ected. It only ever exists in 
           an ideal way, like the foreknowledge Boethius was concerned about. 
           And like that knowledge, it is a projection outside time and space 
           and hence has no e7ect on either randomness or freedom.
             Likewise,  Hugh  Everett’s  model  for  explaining  how  measure-
           ments  seem  to  simultaneously  a7ect  other  places  in  space- time 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   244                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   245

           works  as  mathematics,  but  it  requires  a  presumption  of  godlike 
           knowledge for us to assume its reality. The invisible pullulations of 
           those inﬁnite other worlds can remain only that, shadows, impos-
           sible to discover, alternate realities conjured to assuage the discomﬁt 
           caused by the inconsistencies of our own.
              Only, what if those inconsistencies are only apparent? What if 
           there is a better explanation than an inﬁnite proliferation of worlds? 
           This is what Borges intuited, in a move that, remarkably, will bring 
           us back to Heisenberg.


           9"-K"  )'8"9"  +"* " child  when  she  ﬁrst  saw  Borges.  Accord-
           ing to her recollection, she had accompanied her father to one of 
           Borges’s lectures and ventured up to talk to him a.erward. He was 
           ﬁ.y. She was twelve. Later she took a class on Icelandic literature 
           with him at the University of Buenos Aires, a.er which she joined 
           his weekly class at the National Library on Anglo- Saxon language 
           and  literature.30  Some  two  decades  a.er  that  ﬁrst  meeting,  María 
           Kodama began to come regularly to the apartment he shared with 
           Elsa Astete, assisting the now blind writer by reading to him and 
           working through texts composed in Anglo- Saxon.
              Racked  by  unhappiness  and  loneliness  in  his  failed  marriage, 
           Borges had clearly started to develop feelings for Kodama during 
           this time but resisted acknowledging them given the di7erence in 
           their ages: she was now in her early thirties; he was nearing seventy. 
           In December 1969, a.er a reading at the Ninety- Second Street Y in 
           New York, the Borgeses were invited to a party, but Elsa refused to 
           go. María Kodama was in New York and did attend. As she would 
           later tell Borges’s biographer Edwin Williamson, a.er this meeting 
           and a.er seeing Borges in such distress, Kodama realized that the 
           tenderness and pity she felt for him manifested something deeper.31
              The  following  summer  Borges  and  Elsa  Astete  separated,  but 
           another year would pass before the occasion arose where Borges and 
           María Kodama would consummate their hidden passion. In March 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   245                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           246             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           1971, Borges’s American translator arranged a stopover for him in 
           Iceland. María joined him there. Iceland, Borges said, was a “dream 
           come true.”32 There, overwhelmed by emotion to be in the land of 
           the Eddas and sagas he loved so dearly, they confessed their feelings 
           for each other. At seventy- one years old, the rueful and abandoned 
           man ﬁnally found requited love.33
             María Kodama initially refused to marry him, citing her distaste 
           for  the  institution,  but  would  eventually  do  so  on  his  deathbed. 
           Borges’s love for her, but also for Iceland and its ancient culture, 
           provided him with inspiration for several stories. One of these tells 
           the tale of a medieval Icelander named Ulf Sigurdarson who goes 
           on a quest for a mythical people known as the Urns. Upon entering 
           their land, Sigurdarson learns the name of the Urnish king, Gunn-
           laug. Despite being told of the king’s unpleasant habit of crucifying 
           foreigners,  he  composes  a  poem  about  his  deeds  and  commits  it 
           to memory, at which point two men appear as if on cue to convey 
           him  to  meet  the  king.  They  take  him  on  a  journey  along  which 
           he encounters mystical, Christological objects— a ﬁsh on a yellow 
           stake, a disk on a red stake— each of which, his guides tell him, “is 
           the Word.”34
             When Sigurdarson enters in the presence of Gunnlaug, who lies 
           dying of a “great a>iction,” a harp is presented to him.35 He takes it 
           up and sings the poem he composed. The king appears pleased and 
           gi.s him with an iron ring. Then an onlooker takes the harp from 
           him and sings a song composed of a single word, which Sigurdar-
           son is not able to make out. As all those present ﬁle out, someone 
           touches Sigurdarson on the shoulder and tells him he will soon die, 
           because he has heard the Word. But, he adds, because he is a poet of 
           the same lineage as Sigurdarson, he will endeavor to save him.
             The  poet,  Bjiarni  Thorkelsson,  explains  to  Sigurdarson  that 
           while his song told of many things, the poetry of the Urns encodes 
           all things into a single word. He cannot reveal the Word to him, 
           though; Sigurdarson must seek it on his own. He promises to hide 
           him for the night, and the next day Sigurdarson sails south. He trav-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   246                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   247

           els for many years and lives the equivalent of many lives, but, as he 
           says, “the essential thing was always the Word.”36
              When  he  ﬁnally  returns  to  the  Urns,  Sigurdarson  ﬁnds  again 
           the house of Thorkelsson, who is now dying himself. When he sees 
           his old friend has returned, Thorkelsson takes up the harp to sing. 
           This time, Sigurdarson hears the Word. The dying poet, he recounts, 
           “spoke  the  world Undr,  which  means wonder.”  Here  Sigurdarson 
           ends his narrative, and Borges his story, in this way:

              I was overwhelmed by the song of the man who lay dying, but 
              in his song, and in his chord, I saw my own labors, the slave girl 
              who had given me her ﬁrst love, the men I had killed, the cold 
              dawns, the northern lights over the water, the oars. I took up the 
              harp and sang— a di7erent word.
                 “Hmm,” said the poet, and I had to draw close to hear him. 
              “You have understood me.”37

              In this story, dreamed up in the land of his dreams, surrounded 
           by the ﬁre and ice, the Eddas and sagas of a distant past, Borges dis-
           tilled the poetic answer to the riddle he conjured thirty-ﬁve  years 
           prior. Imprisoned in the here and now, siloed by an ever-narrowing  
           thresher of choices, we combine and connect experiences and create 
           a story of ourselves, a timeline of our lives. At the same time, though, 
           we imagine a story of our unlived lives, potentially inﬁnite ramiﬁ-
           cations  of  worlds  and  meanings  exceeding  the  grasp  of  anything 
           but our imaginations. In identifying what we are, we close o7 those 
           pathways we didn’t take, turn them into ghosts, pullulations that 
           haunt the garden of our dreams.
              But what is it that permits this ﬂight of the self? What connects 
           disparate moments in space and time while also projecting us to 
           places unseen? The Word, the Aleph—these  are Borges’s names for 
           that  minimal  abstraction  from  absorption  in  the  world, that  syn-
           thesis of one moment in space-time  to another that permits such 
           moments  to  be  moments  at  all.  This  Word  is  language,  yes,  but 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   247                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           248             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           it is also something deeper than that. We ﬁnd it in the power of 
           poetry, to combine multiple meanings in one sign. But beyond even 
           poetry it forms the essence of knowledge, the condition of possibil-
           ity of perception, the active ingredient in anything we could call, 
           citing Einstein, an observation—the  coincidence in space and time 
           between an instrument and the hands on a clock.
             Indeed, the Word and all those mystical entities in Borges’s long 
           oeuvre  stand  in  for  something  he  teased  out  already  in  his  story 
           about a man who couldn’t forget. We seek to know the world, to 
           know it perfectly, but the very power of that knowledge, the very 
           source of its drive, stems from its imperfection, its inability to be 
           identical to what it knows. This is what the poet understood when 
           he took the harp of a dying man and said another word. To experi-
           ence anything at all, to grasp any one thing, to observe a particle, 
           to hold on to the ﬂow of an a.ernoon in life, is also to experience 
           something  else,  and  to  open  the  imagination  toward  what  could 
           have been, but wasn’t.
             The very fact that we can conceive of roads not taken but cannot 
           actually take them means that, for all the best e7orts of religion and 
           science  alike  to  speak  in  the  name  of  God, our  freedom  remains 
           ineradicable. In a short story he published in 1960, the year before 
           his meteoric rise but already the best- known writer in Argentina, 
           Borges describes his relationship to another Borges, the public intel-
           lectual and author. He relates how, bit by bit, he has been passing 
           more of himself over to this other Borges, the one who has, Borges 
           says, a perverse way “of distorting and magnifying everything.” He 
           confesses  that,  years  ago,  he  tried  to  free  himself  from  this  other 
           Borges by moving on “from the mythologies of the slums and out-
           skirts of the city to games with time and inﬁnity.” But those games, 
           he concedes, “belong to Borges now, and I shall have to think up 
           other things.” Naturally, by the end of the page, which is the length 
           of the story, the narrator admits he is not sure “which of us it is that’s 
           writing this page.”38
             Of course, he cannot know, for the very same reason that neither 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   248                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                  Forking Paths                   249

           Borges, nor Yu Tsun, nor for that matter you or I, or any of us can 
           ever experience those inﬁnite roads not taken. It is because I cannot 
           take both roads and still be the same traveler that I imagine them 
           and, in imagining them, and in choosing, am condemned to that 
           very freedom that the godlike knowledge of a mechanistic universe 
           seeks to absolve me of. We seek to render that godlike knowledge 
           real; we contort our imagination and make myths out of math; we 
           brew bubbling Kandinsky multiverses39 and grow gardens of inﬁ-
           nitely forking paths. But the intimate ri.s, the interstices of unrea-
           son that those models seek to obliterate, are indelible. They inhabit 
           us. They make us what we are.
              Which is exactly what Heisenberg’s greatest discovery revealed.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   249                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                                     12

                            PUTTING THE             
                          DEMON TO REST


                  # " :''2 *0#8", in late April 1934, the Washington Sena-
                  tors’ catcher Morris Berg made a ﬁelding error. That error 
          Obroke what had been an American League record of 117 
           consecutive error- free games— a high point in an otherwise average 
           baseball career. A.er leaving the Senators later that summer, Berg 
           played for the Cleveland Indians and then joined the American all- 
           star team as their third- string catcher for a trip to Japan before mov-
           ing to Boston, where he played his last ﬁve seasons with the Red Sox.
             While mostly unremarkable on the baseball diamond, Moe Berg 
           earned  fame  and  respect  for  what  he  did  outside  the  ballpark.  A 
           graduate of Princeton and Columbia, he was known for his smarts 
           and his ability to speak multiple languages, a trait his teammates 
           shrugged o7 with the practiced nonchalance of the bullpen. As the 
           Senators’  outﬁelder  Dave  Harris  quipped  when  asked  about  the 
           seven languages his teammate reportedly spoke, “Yeah, I know, . . . 
           and he can’t hit in any of them.”1 When he appeared on the popu-
           lar quiz show Information Please in 1939, Berg essentially broke the 
           radio, spouting disquisitions ranging from the meaning of words 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   250                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             251

           in  ancient  languages  to  dates  of  obscure  events  in  history.  A.er 
           that star turn, Kenesaw Mountain Landis, the league’s ﬁrst commis-
           sioner, told him he had done more for baseball in half an hour than 
           Landis himself had done in his entire tenure. But Moe Berg’s most 
           important service was yet to come.
              In 1942, General William Donovan, head of the O<ce of Strate-
           gic Services, started assembling a team of spies dedicated to ferreting 
           out information about the state of Germany’s atomic research. He 
           appointed Moe Berg to lead the team. By 1944, Berg, now posted in 
           Switzerland, picked up the scent of his number one quarry: the head 
           of  Germany’s  nuclear  research  project,  Werner Heisenberg.  Con-
           cerned that Heisenberg could be working on an atomic bomb, Berg 
           joined forces with an experimental physicist at Zurich’s Polytech-
           nic University, Paul Scherrer, a committed anti- Nazi, and persuaded 
           him to invite Heisenberg to give a lecture. While they prioritized 
           detaining and questioning Heisenberg and his fellow physicists, the 
           Allies  didn’t  exclude  more  drastic  options,  should  the  need  arise. 
           Berg  attended  the  talk  and  sat  next  to  Heisenberg  at  the  dinner 
           Scherrer hosted a.er the event, a loaded pistol under his jacket. He 
           never had to use his ﬁrearm that evening. Heisenberg spoke about 
           an obscure new attempt at creating a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory. He didn’t 
           mention atomic weapons once.2
              Because Berlin had increasingly been leveled by Allied bomb-
           ing, all scientiﬁc operations, including Heisenberg’s atomic research 
           facility  located  in  the  ominously  (and  deliberately)  named  Virus 
           House on the grounds of the Kaiser Wilhelm Research Institute, had 
           been forced to seek alternate quarters in the small town of Hechin-
           gen, in Germany’s Black Forest. There, in the hectic last months of 
           the war, Heisenberg had come closer than ever before to producing 
           a sustained ﬁssion reactor. Having decided that killing Heisenberg 
           wasn’t warranted, Berg next coordinated his capture. From the post-
           mark on an intercepted letter to a Swiss colleague, Berg now knew 
           the location of Heisenberg’s new lab.
              On April 19, as Allied forces closed in on Hechingen, Heisen-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   251                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           252             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           berg mounted the sole form of transportation le. to him, a bicycle, 
           and headed east, his only thought to rejoin his wife, Elisabeth, and 
           their six children. Heisenberg’s family had been living out the war’s 
           last months su7ering from cold and hunger in a mountain lodge 
           in Urfeld, in the Bavarian mountains, to which they had decamped 
           when their house in Leipzig had been razed by bombs. Urfeld was 
           250 kilometers from Hechingen. Heisenberg pedaled by night to 
           avoid being shot by American aircra. or by roving German com-
           mandos, desperately fulﬁlling their führer’s ﬁnal orders to kill any 
           Germans seen ﬂeeing the enemy.3
             On the day that Adolf Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide 
           in Berlin, the U.S. command in Heidelberg sent a team in search 
           of Heisenberg. The team’s leader, Colonel Boris T. Pash, driven by 
           the urgency of what he believed to be “the most important single 
           intelligence mission of the war,” was relentless in his pursuit.4 Arriv-
           ing  in  the  nearby  town  of  Kochel  on  May  1,  1945,  Pash’s  troops 
           reported that the bridge on the only road leading up the mountain 
           to Urfeld had been demolished and the road was impassable. Not 
           to be deterred, Pash and a few men climbed the still snow- covered 
           mountain by foot. Upon reaching the tiny town, they exchanged ﬁre 
           with some of the German battalion that occupied the town. During 
           a pause in the ﬁreﬁght, Pash saw two o<cers approaching on scoot-
           ers. While discussing terms with them, he realized that the Germans 
           believed him to have far more than the few soldiers who had hiked 
           up with him. Deciding it would be unwise to correct this impres-
           sion, he ordered the Germans to assemble their men in the town 
           the next day for an organized surrender. Once the scooters drove o7 
           again, he and his party hurried back down the mountain and used 
           the bought time to repair the bridge in the night, allowing the rest 
           of his trucks and men to pull in to town the following morning just 
           in time to accept the Germans’ surrender.
             Only a.er taking charge of his prisoners did Pash turn to the 
           pressing business at hand. Accompanied by two soldiers, he hiked 
           the remaining way up the mountain to the front steps of Heisen-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   252                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             253

           berg’s mountain retreat, where he found the great physicist awaiting 
           him on his veranda. Heisenberg politely invited Pash in, introduced 
           him to his wife and children, and then gathered his belongings and 
           accompanied the colonel into custody.5
              Given the nature of their quarry, it was natural that Pash’s team 
           would include a scientist. The one chosen for the job was Samuel 
           Goudsmit, a Dutch experimental physicist who had immigrated to 
           the United States to take up a position at the University of Michi-
           gan long before the war broke out. Goudsmit had met Heisenberg 
           as a young man and had been duly awed by the genius who had 
           founded the ﬁeld of quantum mechanics. He had enjoyed conversa-
           tions with him again when Heisenberg lectured at the University of 
           Michigan in 1939.
              During the early years of the war Goudsmit had become increas-
           ingly  alarmed  for  the  safety  of  his  aging  parents.  A.er  the  Nazis 
           occupied the Netherlands, he set to work obtaining visas for them. 
           Tragically, they had only just received their papers when the depor-
           tation of Dutch Jews began in earnest in 1943. Before they could 
           escape, they were rounded up and delivered to Auschwitz. Heisen-
           berg received an appeal through common friends to advocate for 
           the Goudsmits, to which he responded by writing a letter touting 
           his own experience of their hospitality to him and other Germans 
           during visits to Holland. It was to no avail. By the time he had writ-
           ten the letter, the Goudsmits had met their end in the gas chambers. 
           Not long a.er the death of his parents, Samuel Goudsmit, now a 
           U.S. agent in charge of tracking down Germany’s atomic research-
           ers, wept over the ruins of his childhood home, overcome “by that 
           shattering emotion all of us have felt who have lost family and rela-
           tives and friends at the hands of the murderous Nazis.”6
              Back in Urfeld, his bags packed, and tearful farewells exchanged 
           with his wife and children, Heisenberg departed with Colonel Pash 
           and his team for a long, bumpy journey by truck to his ﬁrst deten-
           tion site, the American base in Heidelberg. There he was brought 
           into an interrogation room. As he looked across the table, he found 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   253                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           254             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           himself  staring  into  the  angry  eyes  of  his  former  friend  and  col-
           league Samuel Goudsmit. The conversation that followed wouldn’t 
           end that day. Instead, it metastasized into years of accusations and 
           rebuttals, recriminations and rehabilitations, all swirling around the 
           question of Werner Heisenberg’s responsibility in working for the 
           most despicable regime the world had ever seen.


           $+&#$, ,&"-* &"-21&-, 2"$& at night in a sparsely appointed room 
           on a barren island in the North Sea, when the fog of hay fever li.ed 
           from his brain, what Heisenberg saw spread out in mathematical 
           script  before  his  mind’s  eye  had  changed  humanity’s  most  basic 
           assumptions about nature and our relation to it. Since Newton had 
           derived the fundamental laws determining how objects move, scien-
           tists had become convinced that the physical reality we inhabit must 
           follow those rules at all levels and in all ways. No matter how tiny 
           the  objects  in  question, or  how  small  the  distances, knowing  the 
           mass of an object, its exact place in the universe, and every force act-
           ing upon it, one could know everything about that object’s future. 
           The only limit was on the part of the knower. Those of us observing 
           the object might be constrained in how far or how small we could 
           focus  our  gazes  or  instruments,  but  as  far  as  the  object  was  con-
           cerned, its fate was sealed.
             On the island of Heligoland, two years even before he wrote his 
           uncertainty paper, the abstruse mathematics Heisenberg invented 
           to account for the before and a.er measurements of electrons deci-
           sively undermined that premise. The problem was that Heisenberg’s 
           math didn’t commute. For those who haven’t had to think about 
           math since high school, the commutative property means that what 
           you can do in one direction, you can also do in the other. It’s the 
           same if you multiply two times eight as if you multiply eight times 
           two. But the commutative property that held for operations in nor-
           mal mathematics no longer worked in Heisenberg’s matrices. It was 
           as if carrying out the operation in one order undid the possibility of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   254                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             255

           doing it in reverse, such that the answer one got from multiplying 
           two and eight depended on whether one decided to start with two 
           or start with eight.
              In  the  speciﬁc  case  Heisenberg  was  working  on,  the  numbers 
           were sets of numbers— these were the matrices in question— that 
           represented either the momentum or the position of an electron as 
           measured  in  an  experiment.  The  non- commutability of  his  equa-
           tions  signiﬁed  one  astounding  fact:  the  product  of  an  electron’s 
           observed momentum multiplied by its observed position will always 
           be di7erent from the product of its observed position multiplied 
           by its observed momentum.7 In other words, it makes a di7erence 
           whether one measures the momentum and then the position or the 
           position and then the momentum, because what one chooses to start 
           with changes the result for the next measurement.
              While  it  took  Heisenberg  another  two  years  to  formulate  the 
           uncertainty principle, in some ways it too ﬂows from this original 
           discovery. For if the fundamental insight of quantum mechanics is 
           that one must choose to measure position or momentum ﬁrst, and 
           what  one  chooses  a7ects  what  one  will  come  up  with  when  one 
           measures the next value, this necessarily leads to a fundamental limit 
           on the amount of information we can have about the world. As we 
           drill down into the most basic presumption of Newton’s classical 
           world— namely, that knowing everything about a particle’s position 
           and momentum and the forces acting on it means knowing its past 
           and future— we run into an impenetrable barrier. Perfect precision 
           in our knowledge of the one creates radical indeterminacy in our 
           knowledge of the other.
              Once we accept the truth of Heinsberg’s discovery, the hard part 
           becomes jettisoning the assumptions we hold about what reality is 
           or must be like. In fact, all the paradoxes associated with quantum 
           mechanics, even the very idea made popular by Richard Feynman 
           that  “nobody  understands  quantum  mechanics,”  stem  from  our 
           resistance to letting go of these assumptions.8 Indeed, letting go is 
           hard. A.er all, if geniuses like Einstein couldn’t do it, if swaths of 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   255                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           256             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           top- notch physicists seem willing to go to any length to avoid let-
           ting go of it, that’s because the “it” in question contains one of our 
           most basic beliefs about reality, namely, that it is, in Borges’s words, 
           “ubiquitous in space and durable in time.”9
             But what if it is not? What if reality is not extended smoothly 
           in space and time, but something fundamentally di7erent? What if 
           space and time are themselves nothing but, as Einstein himself so 
           brilliantly saw, the indexes of measurements, coincidences between 
           two  events  noticed  by  a  third  party.  In  fact,  if  we  fully,  radically 
           accept this premise as our starting point, the paradoxes of quantum 
           mechanics dissipate like warm breath on a cold day. We quickly see 
           that  the  strangeness  sprang  from  what  we  expected  to  see, rather 
           than from what we in fact observe.
             Let’s take the measurement problem itself. How can it be, we 
           wonder, that what we decide to measure, here and now, determines 
           the path the electron has taken through time and space to reach us? 
           How can the electron “know” that we detected it going through one 
           slit, and  thereby “decide,” instantly, not  to  have  gone  through  the 
           other, thus violating relativity’s ban on the superluminal transfer of 
           information? How can one particle of an entangled pair instanta-
           neously “tell” its other what spin it chose, no matter how far the dis-
           tance has grown between them? The answer is simple. It can’t. The 
           electron doesn’t know anything; the particle doesn’t communicate 
           anything. We do. But what we now know in that moment pertains 
           to us, period. We cannot transfer that knowledge anywhere else, to 
           anyone else, other than by good, old-fashioned  subluminal commu-
           nication. We may now know that since our particle has a down spin, 
           its pair will be measured as up, but until we can communicate it, 
           this knowledge is as irrelevant to anyone else’s knowledge of the 
           world as is Sam Harris’s imaginary speculation of what he would 
           be like if he swapped all the atoms in his body for those of a serial 
           killer. Only the gods of small and large things can know this, and 
           those gods don’t talk.
             Like Frost’s walker in the woods, when I look back at my life, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   256                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             257

           the path I am on is the one I have taken, no other. This is what I 
           measured; this is what I found. I may now infer what I would have 
           found on that other path, but other walkers won’t know until they 
           walk down it themselves.
              If we accept this simple premise, we can also see the monumen-
           tal  metaphysical  e7ort  made  by  those  alternative  approaches  to 
           avoid this simple understanding, all because they want to salvage 
           a speciﬁc, sacred idea of reality. Their resistance to the fundamen-
           tal  non- commutability  that  Heisenberg  discovered  (when  they 
           insist that our observation can’t change reality), their resistance to 
           the fundamental limitation in how much of reality one can know 
           (when they insist that there must have been a path there, between 
           the observations), all comes down to this: reality is something out 
           there, independent of us, ubiquitous in space and durable in time. 
           But again, perhaps it’s not. Perhaps, rather, what constitutes the real-
           ity for any single entity is nothing other than the relation it has with 
           something else, in Carlo Rovelli’s words, “the way in which one part 
           of nature manifests itself to any other single part of nature.”10 Vitally, 
           as that renowned physicist and creator of the relational interpreta-
           tion of quantum mechanics has also put it, far from conﬂicting with 
           relativity, this understanding is a continuation of its most important 
           insight, the “discovery that all the properties (variables) of all objects 
           are relational, just as in the case of speed.”11
              The   twenty-four-  year- old  hiking  on  Heligoland,  the 
           twenty- six- year- old walking at night in Copenhagen’s Faelled Park, 
           they didn’t reﬂect too deeply on this problem. Those two respective 
           moments in the life path that would be Werner Heisenberg’s were 
           too busy sloughing o7 the blinders of expectations to consciously 
           construct  a  new  interpretation  of  reality.  But  soon,  as  a  newly 
           anointed professor started gathering his students around him, that 
           man did start to ask those questions. And one of the ways he did so 
           was by reading, discussing, and writing about the works of Imman-
           uel Kant.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   257                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           258             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           '#& '3 $%& *$"#8'0$* among the group of physicists who rushed 
           to Leipzig to work with Werner Heisenberg when he assumed his 
           professorship  there  was  a  young  nobleman,  Baron  Carl  Friedrich 
           von Weizsäcker. Weizsäcker would go on to work with Heisenberg 
           in the German atomic program as well as make important discov-
           eries in the science of nuclear fusion, but as a young man he had 
           studied philosophy before opting for physics, and he brought these 
           interests with him to Leipzig. For his part, Heisenberg had already 
           made clear the challenge that his discoveries, in particular the uncer-
           tainty principle, posed for the dominant philosophical understand-
           ing  of  reality.  As  he  had  written,  uncertainty  demolishes  the  law 
           of causality that both science and philosophy presume sacrosanct, 
           because that law depends on the premise that we can know the pres-
           ent fully, which uncertainty showed we cannot.
             The demise of causality was not something that either scientists 
           or philosophers were going to swallow without a ﬁght. And so it was 
           that in his ﬁrst years as a full professor in charge of his own institute 
           Heisenberg took that ﬁght to the philosophers. He began with a lec-
           ture at home in Leipzig, attended by the philosophy department and 
           interested members of a broader audience. Soon he would develop 
           those ideas and bring them out in the form of a paper called “Causal 
           Law and Quantum Mechanics,” which he delivered in Vienna, then 
           the world capital of the scientiﬁcally oriented branch of philosophy 
           known as logical positivism.12
             In challenging the philosophers, Heisenberg knew that he would 
           also have to take on the greatest of them all, Immanuel Kant. In his 
           lectures and papers Heisenberg remained respectful of Kant’s awe-
           some imprint on intellectual history, but he didn’t shy from claim-
           ing that quantum mechanics posed such enormous challenges to 
           the critical system that, he feared, philosophers would now face the 
           “very di<cult task of rolling out the Kantian basic problem of epis-
           temology once again and, so to speak, starting all over again.”13
             The “basic problem” Heisenberg identiﬁed was the demarcation 
           in Kant’s system between a priori and a posteriori knowledge, that 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   258                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             259

           is, the  portion  of  our  knowledge  that  must  be  true, independent 
           of all experience, and that portion we learn by interacting with the 
           world through our senses. Kant had taught that space and time and 
           the  causal  relation  of  events  in  space  and  time  were  not  aspects 
           of the world that we picked up through living in it, as Hume had 
           argued,  but  rather  the  necessary  conditions  of  possibility  of  our 
           picking up anything at all about the world. Kant had gone further 
           than merely positing some notion of space, time, and causality as a 
           priori, however. In the ﬁrst section of The Critique of Pure Reason he 
           had extrapolated from the necessarily spatial and temporal form of 
           our intuition to the basic rules of geometry itself. In other words, 
           since space is one of the a priori forms governing our very ability 
           to perceive the world, what we can derive about such ideal shapes 
           as triangles and rectangles and the mathematical rules that govern 
           them must also be a priori true. We know that the area of a triangle 
           is one half the product of its height and its base, and this knowledge 
           doesn’t depend on our ever having encountered or measured a tri-
           angle in our daily lives.
              But this idea of geometry and the model of space and time that 
           informed it, Heisenberg argued, had already been sidelined by Ein-
           stein’s  general  relativity  paper,  which  not  only  had  incorporated 
           Riemann’s non- Euclidean geometry but also had made that geom-
           etry central to the very functioning of the cosmos. In the Rieman-
           nian spaces needed to understand how gravity warps space- time and 
           ultimately the shape of the cosmos itself, the long-standing  truth of 
           a triangle’s area simply no longer held true, and hence the rules of 
           Euclid couldn’t be considered a priori at all.
              To make matters worse, if Einstein had done a number on space- 
           time, Heisenberg had put the kibosh on causality. The Kantian idea 
           of causality depended on an observer isolating an object in space 
           and time and determining the directly preceding cause to its present 
           situation (its position and momentum). As Heisenberg explained 
           it, “Whereas  beforehand  the  spatiotemporal  description  could  be 
           applied to an isolated object, it is now essentially linked to the inter-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   259                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           260             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           action  between  the  subject  and  its  observer  or  its  apparatus. The 
           object in total isolation no longer has, in essence, any describable proper-
           ties.”14 Heisenberg still believed the essence of Kant’s position was 
           right; namely, that some aspect of our knowledge of the world had 
           to  come  from  us  and  not  from  the  world. Nevertheless, that  line 
           would have to move. He had made his challenge, and it was time for 
           the philosophers to respond.
             Respond they did. But while papers abounded and some of the 
           top thinkers in the world weighed in on the inﬂuence of quantum 
           mechanics on Kantian thought and on philosophy in general, the 
           most direct and ultimately e7ective intervention came from a rising 
           star in neo- Kantian circles named Grete Hermann. Exercised by the 
           challenge posed by the new physics, Hermann came to Leipzig in 
           1932 for a series of discussions with Heisenberg and his circle, dis-
           cussions in which his newest acolyte, the aristocratic philosopher- 
           physicist Weizsäcker, played a prominent role.
             In her opening salvo, Hermann presented the challenge in pre-
           cise Kantian terms. Causality can’t depend on experience, because 
           it’s “the very basis of all experience.”15 How can experiments, which 
           proposed to say something meaningful about the world by hypoth-
           esizing  claims  and  testing  them  with  apparatuses  and  observed 
           results, produce knowledge of the world that undermines the very 
           presuppositions on which our inferences are then based? In other 
           words, if our results tell us that the most basic presuppositions for 
           obtaining those results aren’t true, then don’t we need to be rethink-
           ing  the  conclusions  we  are  drawing?  If  quantum  mechanics  has 
           led people to believe that observable e7ects, such as the decay of a 
           radium atom and emission of an electron, happen without a cause, 
           isn’t it far more reasonable to assume the cause exists and we just 
           haven’t delved deeply enough to ﬁnd it?16
             Heisenberg  responded  by  describing  a  version  of  the  two-slit  
           experiment. If a detection apparatus such as a screen beyond two slits 
           registers the behavior of electronic emissions passing through those 
           slits, it will show them interfering with each other, just as waves do 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   260                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             261

           when passing through two sluices. But if we add an apparatus at one 
           of the slits to determine which direction an electron went, its other 
           possible direction is “extinguished,” and the pattern ceases to show 
           up. If the indeterminacy of the direction of emission were simply a 
           matter of our not knowing enough, we could presumably position 
           monitors more closely to the sources and ﬁgure out which direction 
           the emissions are taking. But we can’t, because when we do that, no 
           interference occurs. The very phenomenon we are trying to learn 
           more about disappears when we try to learn more about it. Which is 
           to say, it’s simply not the case that our original detector doesn’t tell 
           us the whole story and that a more precise measurement will tell us 
           more. A particle is in multiple places until it is measured; we cannot 
           assume a determinate time, place, or cause for its movement prior 
           to our intervention.17
              Hermann, clearly unsettled by this evidence, continued to insist 
           that atoms and particles must be objects and hence determined by 
           such categories as substance and causality. But while the two sides 
           failed  to  bridge  the  chasm,  Heisenberg  and  Weizsäcker  learned 
           something from the encounter. Before Hermann took her leave of 
           them, Weizsäcker spelled out the position that would continue to be 
           Heisenberg’s for the rest of his career. Space, time, and causality must 
           indeed be treated as a priori, even for relativity and quantum theory. 
           However, these new theories decisively changed their content.18 In 
           what way? Kant simply could not have foreseen the development of 
           an experimental realm “so far beyond daily experience.”19 He could 
           therefore not foresee that atoms, simply put, aren’t objects.20
              Strangely, given Heisenberg’s original position that uncertainty 
           had in some deﬁnitive sense overturned one of Kant’s essential prin-
           ciples, Weizsäcker would eventually maintain that he and Heisen-
           berg remained closer to Kant than did many of the generation of 
           Kantian thinkers who preceded them.21 In Heisenberg’s ﬁnal words 
           on the subject, he averred that Kant’s a priori concepts formed an 
           essential  part  of  modern  physics,  albeit “in  a  somewhat  di7erent 
           sense”: speciﬁcally, space, time, and causality could at one and the 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   261                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           262             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           same time be the very conditions of science and have “only a limited 
           range of applicability.” For, on the one hand, without the assumption 
           of the tightly linked causal chain of events, “nothing can be known 
           about the atomic event.”22 On the other, by following that chain we 
           come to a point that undermines those very preconditions.23
             But, of course, this is exactly the paradox Kant foresaw. For all 
           Heisenberg’s attempts to distance himself, as Weizsäcker suspected, 
           he was moving closer to the Sage of Königsberg all the time. Heisen-
           berg had focused on Kant’s assertions in the ﬁrst part of The Critique 
           of Pure Reason that because space and time were necessary forms of 
           intuition and causality, they must remain unchanged for all time. In 
           so doing, however, he overlooked the second part of the book, the 
           part in which Kant laid out in detail the heuristic nature of these 
           provisions and the paradoxes that would emerge whenever one over-
           stepped and treated them as possible objects of knowledge. There, 
           and later in his third Critique, Kant had stipulated that the continu-
           ity of all existence in space and time and the causal chain linking all 
           events were both necessary presumptions and ultimately unknow-
           able. Whether drilling down into the tightest crevices of space-time  
           or pulling back to contemplate the whole of existence, a scientist 
           could not avoid the abyss that awaited there, an abyss that haunts 
           the limits approached by ever more accurate measurements just as it 
           hovered at the borders of the universe itself.24
             Despite appearances to the contrary, we can and must both pre-
           sume  causality  (to  draw  inferences  from  our  observations) and 
           accept the uncertainty those observations lead to, for even though 
           the extremity of measurements enabled by modern physics was not 
           available to him, Kant knew this: there must be a point at which the 
           minute analysis of causal chains breaks down, not because it lands 
           on one or the other side of the antinomy that lies there, but because 
           that antinomy cannot be solved as long as we treat as real the heuris-
           tic assumptions needed to make inferences in the ﬁrst place. Indeed, 
           just as the universe as a whole must in some sense be contained by 
           its  center,  so  must  our  attempts  to  plumb  the  depths  of  analysis, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   262                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             263

           to arrive at “an experimental realm so far beyond daily experience,” 
           reveal to us the embodied antinomy of what constitutes the very 
           essence  of  a  thing  in  the  world. The  atoms, the  particles  we  seek 
           there, “are neither things nor objects.”25
              “In that case what are they?” Grete Hermann asked Heisenberg 
           and Weizsäcker that day in Leipzig. “We lack the right term,” Heisen-
           berg responded, “for our language is based on daily experience, and 
           atoms are not.” Atoms, he went on, are the words we use to describe 
           “parts of observational situations.” They are the marker of a relation 
           that pertains to only that relation, “since all the terms with which 
           we  describe  experience  apply  to  a  limited  realm  only.”26  In  other 
           words, the paradoxes of quantum mechanics, like those of the antin-
           omies Kant traced from Zeno to his own time, didn’t emerge from 
           Heisenberg’s discovery. They were born of the attempt to make that 
           discovery  conform  to  a  God’s-eye  view  on  nature  that  was  never 
           ours to have in the ﬁrst place.


           "$ I:4@ 1# $%& morning  of  August  6,  1945,  the  United  States 
           dropped an atomic bomb on the city of Hiroshima, leveling most 
           of its buildings, enveloping it in a cloud of radioactivity, and killing 
           well  over  a  hundred  thousand  civilians. On  the  other  side  of  the 
           world Werner Heisenberg was having dinner with his team of Ger-
           man scientists at an estate called Farm Hall, in Godmanchester, En-
           gland. Soon a.er his detention and interrogation in Heidelberg by 
           Samuel Goudsmit, Heisenberg had been moved to France and then 
           ultimately to Farm Hall, where he and his team would be interned 
           for the next six months. When the news came on the radio that eve-
           ning, it cast a pall over the room. The scientists were stunned. As 
           the group slowly came to and started to converse again, Heisenberg 
           told the others, “I was absolutely convinced of the possibility of our 
           making a uranium engine but I never thought that we would make 
           a bomb and at the bottom of my heart I was really glad that it was 
           to be an engine and not a bomb.”27


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   263                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           264             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

             Heisenberg and his team had been working on nuclear ﬁssion 
           for several years. In 1942, Heisenberg had reported to the Nazi gov-
           ernment that while theoretically possible to weaponize, the quanti-
           ties of uranium 235 needed to produce a bomb made it impractical 
           to  do  so.  Had  he  been  wrong?  Or  had  he  feared  the  overwhelm-
           ing moral implications of harnessing for violent ends the power his 
           own discoveries had played such a large role in uncovering? A year 
           earlier Heisenberg traveled to occupied Denmark and met in pri-
           vate with Niels Bohr. Their respective accounts of that conversation 
           di7er signiﬁcantly, have led to decades of speculation about the pur-
           pose of the visit, and even inspired a Tony Award–winning  play. Did 
           Heisenberg go to Copenhagen to extract information from Bohr, to 
           learn something about the Allies’ intentions and potential progress 
           with regard to an atomic weapon? Or did he go to Copenhagen to 
           try to arrive at a tacit agreement with Bohr not to use their knowl-
           edge for such destructive purposes? As they walked alone, with no 
           third party to hear them, did he really pose the question he later 
           claimed to have asked Bohr during their much- disputed meeting 
           in Copenhagen in 1941, “if as a physicist one had the moral right to 
           work on the practical exploitation of atomic energy”?28
             According  to  his  recollections,  as  he  listened  in  horror  to  the 
           reports from Japan, Heisenberg felt devastated. He had thought that 
           Bohr, that the great Einstein, so vocal in his opposition to war and 
           violence, would have entertained the same qualms he had. One week 
           later, Heisenberg lectured to his colleagues and explained to them 
           exactly how the bombs over Hiroshima and Nagasaki had worked. 
           Perhaps  he  had  miscalculated,  but  there’s  almost  no  doubt  that 
           Heisenberg could have worked it out, had he truly wished to do so.
             The response formulated by the group the night they learned of 
           the destruction of Hiroshima would become the basis of Heisen-
           berg’s own version of the role he played in Germany’s atomic proj-
           ect: namely, the German atomic team had concluded early in 1942 
           that, while possible, producing an atomic bomb would be so costly 
           as to be impractical. That the scientists were, furthermore, uncon-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   264                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             265

           vinced of the moral rectitude of such work. That Heisenberg had 
           used the prospect of weaponization to keep the Nazi regime inter-
           ested enough in his work to continue funding and supporting it 
           even while secretly having decided that “an energy-producing  ura-
           nium burner for powering machines”29 was the “only goal attain-
           able.”30 And that his group had tacitly decided it would not work 
           toward the production of a weapon. In 1946 he went so far as to 
           claim that, given their scientiﬁc assessment of the impracticality of 
           pursuing a weapon, the German scientists had been spared “the dif-
           ﬁcult moral decision” taken by their American counterparts.31
              For the Americans, such public pronouncements by Germany’s 
           most famous scientist and one of the founders of their ﬁeld were 
           nearly unbearable. Robert Oppenheimer, for instance, who had led 
           the Manhattan Project and even had a hand in selecting the Japa-
           nese targets, su7ered enormous feelings of guilt in the years a.er 
           the war’s cataclysmic end. The outrage he and his fellows felt now, 
           to be implicitly lectured by colleagues who had chosen to continue 
           to work for a regime like that of the Nazis, was palpable. As one 
           American physicist put it, just as the U.S. team had, the “German sci-
           entists worked for the military as best their circumstances allowed.” 
           The unforgivable di7erence, he added, was that “they worked for the 
           cause of Himmler and Auschwitz, for the burners of books and the 
           takers of hostages.”32
              The debate over the culpability for the development of nuclear 
           weapons would extend for many years, and for many years Heisen-
           berg would embody the German side. The face of the other side 
           would be the same one Heisenberg had gazed into when he was 
           ushered into the interrogation room in Heidelberg: Samuel Goud-
           smit. Goudsmit had been chosen for his role in tracking down and 
           interrogating German scientists both for his knowledge and for his 
           lack  of  it. On  the  one  hand, he  had  deep  reserves  of  expertise  in 
           theoretical and atomic physics; on the other, he was not a part of the 
           top secret Manhattan Project and knew nothing of his colleagues’ 
           progress.  For  Heisenberg’s  part,  once  captured  and  sitting  across 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   265                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           266             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           the  table  from  his  former  colleague, he  felt  the  war  was  lost  and 
           seemed at peace with that and ready to move on to a more promis-
           ing future. As he recalled their conversations in Heidelberg, he told 
           Goudsmit of the German determination not to pursue a bomb and 
           asked him point- blank about the American team’s position. Goud-
           smit responded that they had “made no e7orts in that direction” and 
           that they had “more important things to do.”33 Years later Heisen-
           berg  would  confess  to  Elisabeth  his  shock  when  he  realized  that 
           Goudsmit had lied to him.34
             From  Goudsmit’s  perspective,  made  public  in  a  best-selling  
           book,  Heisenberg  and  the  Germans  were  disingenuous  at  best, 
           highly  complicit  at  worst.  Where  Heisenberg  protested  that  his 
           team knew a bomb was possible but decided not to pursue it for 
           both practical and moral reasons, Goudsmit drew the exact oppo-
           site  interpretation:  the  Germans  under  Heisenberg’s  leadership 
           were too incompetent to realize its feasibility and had covered that 
           incompetence with false moralization, made even more heinous by 
           their willingness to work for an evil regime. Heisenberg became for 
           Goudsmit the face of the complacent incompetence that permitted 
           German physics, once the pride of the world, to be overtaken by the 
           upstart Americans. Trapped by their ideology of racial superiority 
           and besotted by what he called “the smug Heisenberg clique,” the 
           Germans  simply  couldn’t  imagine  that  the  Americans  could  suc-
           ceed where they had failed.35
             Heisenberg aired his own umbrage just as publicly. In a series of 
           letters published in Nature, The New York Times, and elsewhere, he 
           defended the scientiﬁc and moral integrity of his colleagues. In his 
           telling, the Germans knew the theoretical steps involved in runaway 
           ﬁssion; they simply lacked the resources of the American techno-
           logical and industrial machine. Not to be deterred, Goudsmit in his 
           response hewed to the central theme of his book: German science 
           failed because of its totalitarian regime, and Heisenberg, while no 
           doubt resisting the Nazis, did so “not because they were bad, but 
           because they were bad for Germany, or at least for German science.”36


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   266                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             267

              The day a.er the news of the destruction of Hiroshima reached 
           Farm Hall, the detainees gathered to discuss and dra. what would 
           become their o<cial statement. Max von Laue was there and would 
           openly support the statement for many years. Still, later in his life he 
           distanced himself, noting that the position the Germans took that 
           day had been largely orchestrated by Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker 
           and that during the discussions “I did not hear the mention of any 
           ethical point of view.” Heisenberg, he went on to add, emphasizing 
           the point with italics, “was mostly silent.”37
              Whether  Heisenberg  truly  felt  the  ethical  qualms  he  later 
           claimed; or whether these were concocted over time to hide his com-
           plicity; or, as is also possible, whether he genuinely came to believe 
           he had more concerns than he had at the time: these questions are 
           profoundly di<cult to decide. That di<culty in part springs from 
           the challenge that always faces historians: that our object of study, 
           the past, is divided from us by an ever- thickening veil of time that 
           obscures our vision of the events we strive to understand. But this 
           very true limitation on our historical knowledge smuggles with it 
           an assumption about our knowledge of the present. It implies that, 
           were we to pierce that veil of time, were we to be present for certain 
           conversations or even to inhabit the consciousness of the persons 
           whose intentions we wish to understand, our vision would be crys-
           tal clear, and we would have our answer. But what if our assumption 
           is wrong? What if the obscurity inherent in viewing the past lurks in 
           the present as well?
              In 1949, a scant four years a.er the end of the war, the Allies 
           li.ed their prohibition on nuclear research in Germany. Heisenberg 
           and his colleagues immediately set to work, and within less than 
           ten years the Federal Republic of Germany had become one of the 
           world’s leading producers and exporters of atomic energy. Heisen-
           berg’s personal investment in nuclear as a source of power, however, 
           accompanied a ﬁerce conviction that his own country should never 
           be  trusted  with  nuclear  weapons.  Whether  genuine  or  politically 
           motivated or some mixture of the two, the horror he had expressed 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   267                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           268             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           in  Farm  Hall  and  the  worry  he  had  evinced  in  Copenhagen  led 
           Heisenberg to militate against the weaponization of atomic power. 
           When NATO proposed a plan to equip the German army with tac-
           tical  nuclear  weapons  in  1955,  Heisenberg  and  his  circle  openly 
           opposed it and mobilized the German populace in their support. 
           Germany’s ban on nuclear weapons has lasted to this day.
             Likewise, he was convinced that science could best remain peace-
           ful by being an international concern, and to this end he lobbied for 
           the centralization of atomic research at the European level, becom-
           ing an early advocate for the foundation of CERN, the fabled pan- 
           European nuclear research center located in Geneva, now the home 
           of the Large Hadron Collider, the most massive machine ever built 
           by  humankind.  In  1952  he  also  took  the  helm  of  the  Alexander 
           von Humboldt Foundation, Germany’s government-sponsored  pro-
           gram to send its postdoctoral students around the world to collabo-
           rate and share knowledge. He held this position for more than two 
           decades, until illness prevented him from continuing his work.38
             On February 1, 1976, Werner Heisenberg died a.er a long bat-
           tle with kidney cancer. A few years earlier, enjoying the twilight of 
           his years in his mountain cabin in Urfeld, the aging physicist had 
           reﬂected on his early readings of Plato, when he had become cap-
           tivated by the idea that geometrical shapes and mathematical rela-
           tions  could  hold  the  secret  to  the  universe.  Today,  he  concluded, 
           the “particles  of  modern  physics  are  representations  of  symmetry 
           groups  and  to  that  extent  they  resemble  the  symmetrical  bodies 
           of  Plato’s  philosophy.”39  Plato’s  fundamental questions, he  mused, 
           had  perhaps  found  their  answer  in “the  contemporary  physics  of 
           elementary particles.”40
             Back in the United States, a physicist and Nazi hunter who had 
           known him since the golden years, when the young man who looked 
           like a simple farm boy had revolutionized physics, volunteered to 
           pen  his  obituary.  Spent  of  his  vitriol  over  so  many  years,  Samuel 
           Goudsmit would write of his onetime idol, onetime enemy, that he 
           was “a very great physicist, a deep thinker, a ﬁne human being, and 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   268                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             269

           also a courageous person.”41 The man who had lost his parents to the 
           Nazis, who had spent half his life investigating their murderers, had 
           found the grace to rise above his rage.


           +%&# %&1*&#(&-/ 8&:18&8 $' stay in Germany; when he decided 
           initially to ignore or overlook the Nazis’ brutish policies; when he 
           saw what they were doing but decided to focus on the beauty of 
           the science he was doing; when he cooperated with an evil regime 
           in order to protect his work and that of his team— in some ways 
           he was demonstrating precisely the cautious, wait-and-  see attitude 
           that served him so well as a scientist. Heisenberg was never one to 
           let prior beliefs, or indeed deeply held principles, get in the way of 
           evidence. And yet, if there was ever a time to jettison such a predilec-
           tion, it was Germany in the 1930s. That he didn’t do so invites our 
           scrutiny, perhaps even our opprobrium, just as it did Goudsmit’s. 
           But Goudsmit changed his mind.
              Which Samuel Goudsmit was right? The one who judged Heisen-
           berg a hypocrite who later covered over his own incompetence with 
           moral superiority, or the one who forgave Germany’s greatest scien-
           tist and praised his courage? This question, the very idea that Goud-
           smit was right at one time and wrong at another, has the virtue of 
           laying bare an assumption common to both science and morality. 
           That assumption is that things happen independently of our knowl-
           edge of them and that people’s decisions and actions have a moral 
           value in their own right.
              Thankfully, for many of our practical purposes this assumption 
           works  just  ﬁne.  David  Mermin’s  witticism  notwithstanding,  we 
           can be conﬁdent that the moon does not vanish when we cease to 
           look at it. The Spirit of St. Louis most certainly did take a path a.er 
           leaving New York and before being sighted again in the skies over 
           Europe. Likewise, if you embezzle from your company or cheat on 
           your spouse, your responsibility for those crimes or betrayals does 
           not depend on their learning about it. And just as the uncertainty 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   269                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           270             THE RIGOR OF ANGELS

           Heisenberg discovered at the edges of scientiﬁc perception is utterly 
           irrelevant to our tracing a plane’s path on a map, we can and should 
           brush aside any facile reference to his ideas when talking about, say, 
           the reality of an accused person’s actions and intents, or the mean-
           ing of a work of art.
             The  trouble  comes  when  we  take  our  common  and  perfectly 
           acceptable image of reality as an independent space- time in which 
           things  are  happening  in  blissful  disregard  of  our  knowledge  and 
           start applying it where it doesn’t belong: below the limits of observ-
           ability or beyond the very borders of existence itself; between the 
           links of the mechanistic causal chain enabling a human action; or 
           to the very sense of self underlying that action. When we do so, we 
           sacriﬁce the core of what has made the scientiﬁc method so extraor-
           dinarily  successful:  its  profound  humility;  its  awareness  that  our 
           knowledge is always subject to revision, to improvement. Moreover, 
           when we do this, we err profoundly about human agency and free-
           dom, either erasing it along with all responsibility in a vain attempt 
           to understand humans “scientiﬁcally” or projecting at the core of all 
           decisions a purely rational agent, utterly transparent to itself as it 
           navigates life’s choices.
             As we steer a course through the river of our lives, we are a7ected 
           by innumerable forces, the vast majority unknown to us. By some 
           accounts  this  makes  of  our  freedom  an  illusion,  for  how  can  we 
           purport to freely choose when we can’t even see a fraction of the 
           legion of inﬂuences acting on us, limiting our movements, sparking 
           our appetites? The threat this picture poses to traditional notions 
           of agency suggests a counternarrative. There must be some part of 
           us that ﬂoats above the river, untouched by its waters and therefore 
           utterly free and totally responsible for our every turn. But both these 
           pictures are misleading, and for the same reason. Our freedom, and 
           hence our responsibility for the choices we make, is neither a thing 
           to  look  for  in  our  material  existence  nor  some  ghostlike  essence 
           unmoored from that existence. Rather, it is a necessary postulate for 
           a being who can imagine having chosen di7erently, the condition 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   270                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                            Putting the Demon to Rest             271

           of possibility of conceiving of that life as one possible path among 
           many.
              As  Goudsmit  sat  across  the  table  from  Heisenberg  at  his  ﬁrst 
           debrieﬁng  in  Heidelberg,  he  looked  into  the  eyes  of  a  man  he 
           believed had chosen poorly. This man had an opportunity to leave, 
           an opportunity not to serve a regime that killed millions of people, 
           that murdered Goudsmit’s own parents. Over the years as the two 
           men engaged in heated debate, Goudsmit must have felt he knew 
           the path of Heisenberg’s soul, felt he could see his fear of losing his 
           position, see his willingness to make a bomb, if only he could. But 
           he couldn’t see these things.
              When we judge the actions or intentions of another person, we 
           never  have  access  to  their  thoughts,  never  actually  see  the  world 
           from their eyes. We construct an image of their intentions, and then 
           forget  we  made  it.  But  like  an  experimenter  measuring  an  event, 
           what we ﬁnd out pertains to us. It is the product of a relation, the 
           way some part of nature manifests itself to us.
              Ultimately, to judge the guilt or rectitude of another’s choices 
           is not to know the secrets of that person’s heart; it is to consider 
           what I would have done, what I should have done, had I been in 
           that person’s shoes. Indeed, to judge another person is to raise for 
           oneself the question of the path not taken. It is to imagine another 
           life and compare it with one’s own. It is nothing more, and noth-
           ing less, than the existential burden of one who is free to choose, 
           and to regret those choices. As he sat down to write his obituary, 
           Samuel Goudsmit couldn’t know how Werner Heisenberg judged 
           his own life and choices, but in the end he seemed to realize that 
           such knowledge was not his goal. The absolution he gave wasn’t for 
           Heisenberg. It was for himself.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   271                                2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   272                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                              POSTSCRIPT


                   0"#$09 $%&'-, 1* $%& victory of science over the presup-
                   positions that make science possible. That its ﬁndings still 
           Qregister  such  shock  manifests  how  deeply  those  presup-
           positions take root. The physicist Carlo Rovelli puts it this way as 
           he outlines what he calls the relational interpretation of quantum 
           mechanics: “If we imagine the totality of things, we are imagining 
           being outside the universe, looking at it from out there. But there is 
           no ‘outside’ to the totality of things. . . . [W]hat exists are only internal 
           perspectives on the world which are partial and reﬂect one another. 
           The world is this reciprocal reﬂection of perspectives.”1 Indeed, the 
           alternative interpretations of quantum mechanics I have discussed 
           here— from  objective  collapse  to  many  worlds—are,  in  his  words 
           again, “e7orts to squeeze the discoveries of quantum physics into the 
           canons of metaphysical prejudice.”2 Those canons of metaphysical 
           prejudice work in mysterious ways. Even as they guide how scien-
           tists think about the meaning of their most signiﬁcant discoveries, 
           they also a7ect the lives those scientists lead, how they judge their 
           lives, how we all judge our lives.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   273                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           274                     Postscript 

             By the end of their respective lives, Goudsmit’s interpretation of 
           Heisenberg’s  choices  had  changed. But  had  Heisenberg  changed? 
           Had the person who made those decisions—to  stay in Germany; to 
           work for the Nazis; to do his best for German science; to produce, 
           or not to produce, a weapon— changed as well? We tend to imag-
           ine the series of choices an individual makes through the course of 
           her life as if they were the conscious decisions of a completed per-
           son, taken in full knowledge of all the options and their respective 
           consequences, both in the present and as they will eventually play 
           out. We do so because what we think about our own and others’ 
           choices always and by necessity emerges from and takes place in a 
           present from which we look back on those moments, reading them 
           as a path through time leading to the here and now. Even when we 
           might consider such a vision naive, we nonetheless imagine it as the 
           more fulsome picture, how things must have happened even if our 
           limited knowledge in the here and now cannot fully reconstruct it.
             But  perhaps— just  as  Heisenberg  put  it  when  explaining 
           electron  emissions  during  those  long  arguments  with  Grete 
           Hermann— perhaps  our  vision  of  an  ultimately  knowable human 
           path through space and time isn’t merely problematic because it is 
           incomplete. Perhaps it is per se impossible. Like Funes reconstruct-
           ing a day in his memory but needing a full day to do so; like the 
           cosmos repeating itself a.er an unimaginable time but needing a 
           special archangel to notice it; like a man asking if, were he to replace 
           himself, atom for atom, with the person of a murderer, he too would 
           become such a murderer: a perfectly knowable path through space- 
           time utterly contradicts its own presuppositions. Because to register 
           something, anything at all, one must be minimally di7erent from it; 
           one must be in a relation with it.
             What Borges’s stories, Heisenberg’s discovery, and Kant’s system 
           all  reveal  is  that  the  assumption  underlying  this  fantasy,  the  full 
           coincidence of knowing and being, self- destructs on closer examina-
           tion. On the one hand, to measure something is to di7er from it in 
           some minimal but irreducible way, and hence the very condition 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   274                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                   Postscript                     275

           of knowing anything about the world demolishes the possibility of 
           doing so perfectly. On the other hand, full presence, being truly and 
           completely a part of the ﬂow, requires eradicating such di7erence, 
           and hence makes knowledge impossible. One can imagine knowing 
           the world perfectly, but only at the cost of being what one knows; 
           or one can imagine being identical with the world, but only at the 
           cost of knowing it. Like what Heisenberg’s most famous principle 
           revealed about momentum and place, we can’t have both.
              Far from a weakness, however, this fundamental limitation on 
           our knowledge empowers what we have come to call the scientiﬁc 
           method. Science works not despite the limitations of our knowledge 
           but because of our willingness to test our theories and accept the 
           results, whether they a<rm or contradict what we hope or expect 
           to see. This means that a theory endures only as long as observation 
           and experiment continue to support it. Science can always come up 
           with a new explanation for the world; no knowledge is dogma. And 
           yet, while all scientists accept this fact in principle, unconscious bias 
           abounds.  One  such  bias  is  what  Rovelli  called  metaphysical  prej-
           udice,  the  belief  that  reality  exists,  out  there,  independent  of  our 
           interactions with it, and does so in ways that correspond to how we 
           experience human life on earth: smoothly extended in space and 
           successive in time. And this belief, this desire that the world conﬁrm 
           our expectations, is so strong no construct is too wild if it manages 
           to uphold it.
              The  radical  incompatibility  of  being  and  knowledge  also  has 
           massive ramiﬁcations for our understanding of choice and responsi-
           bility. For the scientiﬁc dismissal of free will has always depended on 
           the presumption that somewhere, beyond the natural limits on our 
           ability to know, lies a more complete picture in which each particle 
           of our being is determined by its place and momentum in the causal 
           ﬂow of matter through space- time. If we imagined a being in this 
           ﬂow who was perfectly aware of its place, knowing everything down 
           to the atomic level, that being could, in theory, see everything, but it 
           could not choose. Choices happen in space and time. But for such 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   275                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           276                     Postscript 

           a being— a being at one with the world and aware of it, simulta-
           neously from beginning to end, like the Aleph under the basement 
           stairs— time and space, which require distance, di7erence, relations 
           to something else, don’t exist.
             But  we  are, evidently, not  such  beings. Unlike  such  beings  we 
           are  trapped  in  what  Shakespeare  called “the  dark  backward  and 
           abysm of time,” blind to all that hides from us behind spatial and 
           temporal horizons. And as beings thus trapped in the ﬂow, we may 
           simultaneously  presume  ourselves  determined  by  it  and  yet  still 
           make choices, still be held responsible. Like Robert Frost’s walker 
           in the yellow woods, we pause where the paths fork and peer down 
           one as far as we can, only to lose sight of it as it bends through the 
           underbrush. We feel sorry that we cannot travel both and be one 
           traveler. Indeed, in blatant contradiction to what materialist or reli-
           gious attacks on freedom conclude, the assumption of mechanistic 
           causality is utterly at peace with the existential blindness that allows 
           for responsibility, for freedom.
             So, freedom is just ignorance, and nothing else? Not in the slight-
           est. For as Boethius realized as he stared his impending death in the 
           face, his assumption of an omniscient god who knows every step of 
           the  path  Boethius  would  take  through  life  emphatically  failed  to 
           deprive him of his freedom, failed to absolve him of responsibility or 
           credit for his choices, bad or good. The assumption of such knowl-
           edge dissolves the very space- time medium in which we swim, and 
           hence for that impossible perspective my future choices take place 
           in an eternal now in which knowing for certain what path I will 
           choose has no more e7ect on the freedom of my choices than does 
           someone witnessing me as I make those choices. In the same way, 
           the famed paradoxes born of entanglement lose their sting, because 
           my knowledge of a particle’s yet- to- be- measured spin, or of a twin’s 
           choice of beer or whiskey in a galaxy far, far away, has no more e7ect 
           on either its randomness or the twin’s choice than would the linger-
           ing eyes of the god of things on the particles or people who play out 
           their paths and lives in the eternal present of that limitless mind.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   276                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

                                   Postscript                     277

              In some cases, one knows what one does. In the Garden of Fork-
           ing Paths, you may pull the trigger knowing full well which path 
           you  are  choosing.  In  other  cases,  even  the  one  deciding  doesn’t 
           know why. One physicist leaves; another stays. Those decisions are 
           made and replayed, over and over, as an ever- changing self evolves. 
           To say  so  isn’t  to  invite  inﬁnite  apology, to  grant  clemency  to  all 
           acts. It is, rather, to grasp that the very nature of an entity in time, 
           from the evanescences we call particles up to those massive collec-
           tions of particles known as humans, always and only exists as a rela-
           tion. Just as every measurement involves an interaction and creates 
           a reality exclusive to those parties involved, every individual creates 
           a  life  that  comprises  myriad  relations.  The  relations  don’t  bloom 
           between previously pristine individuals; rather, like the particles our 
           measurements detect, the individuals spring forth from the relations 
           themselves.
              In short, despite our dearest desires and most desperate dreams, 
           we  are  ﬁnite.  That  we  can  only  ever  understand  things  in  rela-
           tion  to  one  another  means  that  understanding  will  always  stem 
           from  a  limited  perspective.  Our  reason  propels  us  to  incredible 
           heights— understanding the  fundamental  components  of  matter 
           and laws of the universe, seeing almost to the edges of the cosmos 
           and the beginning of time. But it also leads us woefully astray. For 
           the very ability we have to map our world and hence see our way 
           through the dark also treats that map as though it were the world, 
           and hence drapes a new veil over our enlightened eyes.
              “Metaphysical  prejudice”:  the  perfect  term  to  describe  that 
           magical thinking that Borges, Heisenberg, and Kant each explored, 
           engaged  with,  and  ultimately  undid.  Quantum  theory  may  not 
           gird us against metaphysical prejudice, but we cannot fully grasp 
           its  meaning  while  maintaining  that  prejudice. And  thus, the  per-
           sistence of its apparent paradoxes serves as a powerful reminder of 
           how deeply set, how necessary to our thinking those prejudices are. 
           When we see an e7ect, we reach for a cause, out there, in a world 
           that is ubiquitous in space and durable in time, because we know, 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   277                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           278                     Postscript 

           just know, that is how the world must be. We know so, but we are 
           wrong. There is rigor there, indeed. But to see that we are the chess 
           masters who made it, we must let the angels go. And that, it seems, 
           is the hardest task of all.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   278                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


                    his book is the product of more than twenty-ﬁve  years of 
                    thinking, teaching, and  writing  about  cosmology, litera-
           T        ture, and philosophy. I ﬁrst started thinking about Dante’s 
           cosmos in a seminar at Stanford taught by Je7rey Schnapp during 
           which I read Bob Osserman’s book Poetry of the Universe and Mark 
           Peterson’s article “Dante and the 3-Sphere”  and was inspired to start 
           studying  medieval  conceptions  of  curved  space.  More  recently  I 
           have taught some version of a course called the Cosmic Imagina-
           tion to my students at Johns Hopkins on at least several occasions, 
           most recently in the fall of 2022 to a marvelous group of freshmen. 
           I  am  grateful  to  all  of  them  for  their  ever-present   curiosity.  I  am 
           also grateful to the many friends and colleagues who looked at all 
           or some of the manuscript during its gestation or interacted with 
           me  at  conferences  or  lectures  I  have  given.  These  include  Robert 
           Davidson, Marcelo Gleiser, Brian Greene, Robert Pogue Harrison, 
           Virginia Jewiss, Robert Leheny, Karen ní Mheallaigh, Yi-Ping  Ong, 
           Gordon Rubenfeld, and Robert Rynasiewicz. My wife, Bernadette 
           Wegenstein, played an outsize role in commenting on the manu-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   279                                2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only

           280                 Acknowledgments 

           script and helped scour the archives for details that helped bring the 
           characters to life. Special thanks go to my agent, Michael Carlisle, 
           whose early guidance helped me form the conception for the book, 
           and to my editor Edward Kastenmeier, who always knew just the 
           right  questions  to  ask. I  also  want  to  thank  Andrew  Weber, who, 
           along with the late and greatly missed Dan Frank, acquired the book 
           for Pantheon. As always I owe a great debt of thanks to Troy Tower, 
           whose  meticulous  eye  and  gargantuan  research  abilities  helped 
           assemble the back matter stemming from multiple disciplines and 
           more than ten languages. Finally, I am forever grateful to a friend, 
           among the truest, who read every word, o.en multiple times. At his 
           own request he remains unnamed.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   280                                2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only


                                       NOTES


            INTRODUCTION: WHERE DID IT GO?
              1.  Bryson, One Summer, 96– 98.
              2.  Gleiser, Island of Knowledge, 169– 70. Very recent research has shown that 
                changes  in  quanta  can  be  continuous  and  predictable. Vitally, however, 
                the experimental conditions for this to happen require “continuous obser-
                vation,”  and  hence  allow  for  “the  reconciliation  of  the  discreteness  of 
                countable events, such as jumps, with the continuity of the deterministic 
                Schrödinger’s equation”; see Minev et al., “To Catch and Reverse a Quan-
                tum Jump Mid- ﬂight,” 203.
              3.  Williamson, Borges, 143, 507n21.
              4.  Ibid., 143.
              5.  Williamson, “Borges in Context,” 208.
              6.  Borges, El  tamaño  de  mi  esperanza,  130,  translation  from  Williamson, 
                Borges, ix.
              7.  Borges, El idioma de los argentinos, 47, translation from Williamson, Borges, 
                148.
              8.  Andrés, Palabras con Leopoldo Marechal, 24, translation from Williamson, 
                Borges, 149.
              9.  Schlosser, Kleine Schri"en, 1:29, translation from Epstein, Genesis of Ger-
                man Conservatism, 79.
             10.  Hamann, Briefwechsel, 4:196, translation altered from Kuehn, Kant, 241.
             11.  Translation from Williamson, Borges, 156.
             12.  Borges, El idioma de los argentinos, 24, 20, 23, translation from Williamson, 
                Borges, 157.
             13.  Borges, El idioma de los argentinos, 24, translation from Williamson, Borges, 
                158.
             14.  Pauli, Wissenscha"licher Briefwechsel, 1:347, translation altered from Lind-
                ley, Uncertainty, 145.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   281                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            282                          Notes 

             15.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C1:21, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 228.
             16.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C1:21, translation altered from Cassidy, 
                Uncertainty, 228.
             17.  Borges, Obras, 1:245, translation from Borges, “Perpetual Race of Achilles 
                and the Tortoise,” 44.
             18.  Borges, Obras, 1:248, translation from Borges, “Perpetual Race of Achilles 
                and the Tortoise,” 47.
             19.  Borges, Obras, 1:273, translation from Borges, “Avatars of the Tortoise,” 202.
             20.  Borges, Obras, 1:258, translation from Borges, “Avatars of the Tortoise,” 202.
             21.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:260, translation from Anderson, Kant, Hume, 
                and the Interruption of Dogmatic Slumber, xi.
             22.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C1:379, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 236.
             23.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:92, translation from Isaacson, Ein-
                stein, 332.
             24.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 389, 326, 609n45.
             25.  Borges, Obras, 1:442, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 81.
             26.  The order of my sections does not match Kant’s antinomies precisely. I 
                begin with his second, the mathematical antinomy of atomism; then pass 
                to his fourth, the dynamical antinomy of necessity; then to his ﬁrst, the 
                mathematical antinomy of space and time; and, ﬁnally, to his third, the 
                dynamical antinomy of causality.

            1. UNFORGETTABLE
              1.  Luria, Romanticheskie ėsse, 17, translation from Luria, Mind of a Mnemonist, 
                11.
              2.  Johnson, “Mystery of S.”
              3.  Luria, Romanticheskie ėsse, 25, translation from Luria, Mind of a Mnemonist, 
                31.
              4.  Bruner, “Foreword,” xxii.
              5.  Luria, Romanticheskie ėsse, 72, translation from Luria, Mind of a Mnemonist, 
                118– 19.
              6.  Bruner, “Foreword,” xvii.
              7.  Johnson, “Mystery of S.”
              8.  Williamson, Borges, 166.
              9.  García Márquez and Mendoza, El olor de la guayaba, 52, translation from 
                García Márquez and Mendoza, Fragrance of Guava, 49.
             10.  Williamson, Borges, 195.
             11.  Borges, Obras, 1:293. While he never revealed the identity of I.J., “English” 
                and “Angel” most likely would have been enough to cement Norah as the 
                addressee. That the protagonist of 45 Days and 30 Sailors is called Ingrid 
                Julia  merely  seals  the  deal.  Williamson  cites  the  1935  edition  but  then 
                notes the change to the “equally mysterious S.D.” that appears in the 1954 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   282                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           283

                edition I cite here. Williamson, Borges, 514n23.
             12.  Borges, Inquisiciones, 85– 86, translation from Borges, “Nothingness of Per-
                sonality,” 4.
             13.  Borges, “Historia de la eternidad,” in Obras, 1:364, translation from Wil-
                liamson, Borges, 214.
             14.  Williamson, Borges, 168, 510n13.
             15.  Borges and Carrizo, Borges el memorioso, 118, translation from Williamson, 
                Borges, 241.
             16.  This marvelous phrase is from Williamson, Borges, 242.
             17.  Borges, Inquisiciones, 93, translation from Williamson, Borges, 98.
             18.  Unamuno, Obras, 10:281– 82, translation from Unamuno, Tragic Sense of 
                Life, 49.
             19.  Homer, Odyssey, 23.240– 45.
             20.  Geier, Kants Welt, 40– 41.
             21.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:70– 71, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 179.
             22.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 2:383.
             23.  Kuehn, Kant, 198.
             24.  Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, 264.
             25.  Mendelssohn, Saemmtliche Werke, 6:vi, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 251.
             26.  Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, 252.
             27.  Ibid., 269.
             28.  Borges, Obras, 1:487– 88, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 134– 35.
             29.  Borges, Obras, 1:489, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 136.
             30.  Borges, Obras, 1:489, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 136.
             31.  Luria, Romanticheskie ėsse, 72, translation from Luria, Mind of a Mnemonist, 
                118– 19.
             32.  Borges, Obras, 1:489, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 136.
             33.  Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, 252.
             34.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  4:77,  translation  from  Kant, Critique  of  Pure 
                Reason, 228– 29.
             35.  Mermin, “What’s Wrong with This Pillow?,” 9.
             36.  Mermin, “Can You Help Your Team Tonight by Watching on TV?,” 50.
             37.  Henderson, “Rebel Physicist on the Hunt for a Better Story Than Quan-
                tum Mechanics.”
             38.  Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 188– 89.
             39.  Henderson, “Rebel Physicist on the Hunt for a Better Story Than Quan-
                tum Mechanics.”
             40.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C1:224,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Reality and Its Order, 27.
             41.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C1:224,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Reality and Its Order, 26.
             42.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  4:77,  translation  from  Kant, Critique  of  Pure 
                Reason, 228.
             43.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  4:77,  translation  from  Kant, Critique  of  Pure 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   283                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            284                          Notes 

                Reason, 228– 29.
             44.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:70– 71, my translation.
             45.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C1:226,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Reality and Its Order, 29.

            2. A BRIEF HISTORY OF THIS VERY INSTANT
              1.  Geier, Kants Welt, 28.
              2.  Ibid., 59.
              3.  Kant, Briefwechsel, 2, my translation.
              4.  Borowski, Darstellung des Lebens und Charakters Immanuel Kants, 32, trans-
                lation altered from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 40.
              5.  Borowski, Darstellung  des  Lebens  und  Charakters  Immanuel  Kants,  185, 
                translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 39.
              6.  Borowski, Darstellung  des  Lebens  und  Charakters  Immanuel  Kants,  186, 
                translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 39.
              7.  See Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 40, 41n5.
              8.  Rink, Ansichten aus Immanuel Kant’s Leben, 14, translation from Cassirer, 
                Kant’s Life and Thought, 18.
              9.  Geier, Kants Welt, 30.
             10.  Hippel, Biographie des Königl. Preuss, 79, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s 
                Life and Thought, 15.
             11.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:133, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and 
                Thought, 18.
             12.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:41, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 171.
             13.  Swedenborg, De caelo et ejus mirabilibus et de inferno, 265; Swedenborg, 
                Heaven and Hell, 261.
             14.  Swedenborg, De caelo et ejus mirabilibus et de inferno, 265– 66; Swedenborg, 
                Heaven and Hell, 261.
             15.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:66, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 172.
             16.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 2:348, translation altered from Kant, Theoretical 
                Philosophy, 335– 36.
             17.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 2:307, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 160.
             18.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 20:175, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 464n65.
             19.  Plato, Opera, 2:129c– d, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 363.
             20.  Plato, Opera, 2:131b, translation altered from Plato, Parmenides, 365.
             21.  Plato, Opera, 2:131c, translation altered from Plato, Parmenides, 365.
             22.  Jachmann, Immanuel Kant geschildert in Briefen an einen Freund, 155– 56, 
                translation altered from Kuehn, Kant, 115– 16.
             23.  Hamann, Briefwechsel, 2:234, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 134.
             24.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 2:41– 42, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 126.
             25.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:58, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 150.
             26.  Kuehn, Kant, 155.
             27.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  20:46,  translation  from  Schilpp, Kant’s  Pre- 
                critical Ethics, 73.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   284                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           285

             28.  Plato, Opera, 2:156d, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 388.
             29.  Plato, Opera, 2:156e, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 388. In fact, it is 
                a stunned Aristotle who is le. to reply, “It looks that way.” While it’s not 
                possible that the Aristotle we know today was present for the meeting of 
                Socrates with Zeno and Parmenides, Plato gives that name to the young 
                student who agrees to be Parmenides’s foil, and adds, “the man who would 
                later  be  one  of  the  Thirty,” referring  to  his  own  academy;  Plato, Opera, 
                2:127d, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 361. It is probable that Plato 
                did this in part because he noticed how struck his own student Aristo-
                tle was by Zeno’s arguments. Indeed, while Zeno’s book itself is lost, we 
                know  about  it  and  his  paradoxes  because  Aristotle  deals  with  them  in 
                great detail in his Physics, which would go on to become one of the central 
                sources for Scholastic science.
             30.  Aristotle, Physics, 180 (bk. 6.9, col. 239b), as quoted in Hegel, Vorlesungen 
                über  die  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  1:296;  the  rather  loose  translation  is 
                from Hegel, Greek Philosophy to Plato, 274.
             31.  Plato, Opera, 2:152b, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 384.
             32.  Plato, Opera, 2:152c– d, translation from Plato, Parmenides, 385.
             33.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:221, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 417.
             34.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 3:345, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 517 (A502): “I do not ﬁnd that this charge can be justly lodged 
                against him.”
             35.  Hegel, Vorlesungen  über  die  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  1:292,  translation 
                from Hegel, Greek Philosophy to Plato, 271.
             36.  Hegel, Vorlesungen  über  die  Geschichte  der  Philosophie,  1:297,  translation 
                from Hegel, Greek Philosophy to Plato, 275.
             37.  Hegel, Greek Philosophy to Plato, 263, recalling Diogenes Laertes (bk. 9).
             38.  The philosophically inclined reader might have realized by now that my 
                interpretation is deeply indebted to the thought of Martin Heidegger and 
                Jacques Derrida, even if neither plays a starring role in this account.
             39.  See Martin Hägglund’s brilliant exposition of this idea in This Life.

            3. VISUALIZE THIS!
              1.  Mehra and Rechenberg, Historical Development of Quantum Theory, 1.1:345.
              2.  Born, My Life, 212.
              3.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C5:399, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 40.
              4.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 563n4, 42.
              5.  Heisenberg, Teil und Ganze, 9.
              6.  Ibid., my translation.
              7.  Ibid., 16.
              8.  Plato, Opera, 4:53b, translation from Plato, Timaeus, 1256.
              9.  Plato, Opera, 4:56a– b, translation from Plato, Timaeus, 1258.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   285                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            286                          Notes 

             10.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:20–21,  translation from W. Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 8.
             11.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C5:102, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 47.
             12.  Heisenberg, Teil und Ganze, 13.
             13.  Ibid., 20, my translation.
             14.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 83.
             15.  See Kirchho7, “Ueber das Verhältniss zwischen dem Emissionsvermögen 
                und dem Absorptionsvermögen der Körper für Wärme und Licht,” 277; 
                and Kirchho7, “On the Relation Between the Emissive and the Absorptive 
                Power of Bodies for Heat and Light,” 76.
             16.  Gribbin, In Search of Schrödinger’s Cat, 37, 41– 42.
             17.  Hermann, Frühgeschichte der Quantentheorie, 31– 32, translation from Mehra 
                and Rechenberg, Historical Development of Quantum Theory, 1.1:49– 50.
             18.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 5.
             19.  Einstein, Swiss Years, 150, translation from Einstein, “On a Heuristic Point 
                of View About the Creation and Conversion of Light,” 91.
             20.  Isaacson, Einstein, 94.
             21.  Planck, “Zur Theorie des Gesetzes der Energieverteilung im Normalspec-
                trum,” 239, translation from Isaacson, Einstein, 96.
             22.  Einstein, “Autobiographisches,” 44, translation from Isaacson, Einstein, 96.
             23.  Bohr, Foundations of Quantum Physics I, 415, 38.
             24.  Gribbin, In Search of Schrödinger’s Cat, 65.
             25.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:44, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 26.
             26.  Forman, “Alfred Landé and the Anomalous Zeeman E7ect,” 261, transla-
                tion from Cassidy, Uncertainty, 119.
             27.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:63, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 41.
             28.  Eddington, Nature of the Physical World, 290– 91.
             29.  Ibid., 291.
             30.  Van der Waerden, Sources of Quantum Mechanics, 168.
             31.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 103– 4.
             32.  Ibid., 106– 7.
             33.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 13.
             34.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:89–90,  translation from W. Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 61.
             35.  Gribbin, In Search of Schrödinger’s Cat, 87– 88.
             36.  Einstein, “Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases,” 9, translation 
                from Hentschel and James, Berlin Years, 377.
             37.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 120.
             38.  Schrödinger, “Undulatory Theory of the Mechanics of Atoms and Mol-
                ecules,” 1058.
             39.  Dresden, H. A. Kramers, 82n84, 51.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   286                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           287

             40.  W. Heisenberg, “Development of the Interpretation of the Quantum The-
                ory,” 14.
             41.  Born, “Zur  Quantenmechanik  der  Stoßvorgänge,” 866,  translation  from 
                Lindley, Uncertainty, 136.
             42.  Einstein, Berlin Years, 403.
             43.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, A1:382, translation from Lindley, Uncer-
                tainty, 115.
             44.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 32.

            4. ENTANGLEMENTS
              1.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 240.
              2.  Hermann, Werner Heisenberg in Selbstzeugnissen und Bilddokumenten, 36, 
                my translation.
              3.  Ibid., my translation.
              4.  Ibid., 37, my translation.
              5.  Ibid., 39, my translation.
              6.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 242; Lindley, Uncertainty, 147– 48.
              7.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, A1:503, translation from Lindley, Uncer-
                tainty, 243.
              8.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 243– 44.
              9.  Ibid., 244.
             10.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 154.
             11.  Ibid., 155.
             12.  “New Problems in Quantum Theory,” Nature, 579.
             13.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 345, 611n26.
             14.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 157.
             15.  Born and Heisenberg, “La mécanique des quanta,” 178, translation from 
                Cassidy, Uncertainty, 250.
             16.  Born  and  Heisenberg, “La  mécanique  des  quanta,” 143,  178,  translation 
                from Cassidy, Uncertainty, 250.
             17.  Born and Heisenberg, “La mécanique des quanta,” 178, translation from 
                Cassidy, Uncertainty, 250.
             18.  Isaacson, Einstein, 346.
             19.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 252– 53.
             20.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 161.
             21.  Lorentz et al., “Discussion générale des idées nouvelles émises,” 256, trans-
                lation from Isaacson, Einstein, 347.
             22.  Gribbin, In Search of Schrödinger’s Cat, 170– 71.
             23.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 169.
             24.  Einstein, “Remarks,” 674.
             25.  “Stimson Says Law Required Action,” New York Times, 3.
             26.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 404, 619n26.
             27.  See Rosenfeld, “Niels Bohr in the Thirties,” 127.
             28.  Ibid., 128.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   287                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            288                          Notes 

             29.  Pauli, Wissenscha"licher Briefwechsel, 2:402, translation from Lindley, Uncer-
                tainty, 191.
             30.  Rosenfeld, “Niels Bohr in the Thirties,” 128.
             31.  Gleiser, Island of Knowledge, 196.
             32.  Bohr, “Can Quantum- Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Con-
                sidered Complete?,” 696– 97.
             33.  Schrödinger, “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik,” 812, 
                translation from Jauch, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, 185.
             34.  Schrödinger, “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik,” 812, 
                translation from Isaacson, Einstein, 457.
             35.  Schrödinger, “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik,” 827, 
                translation from Isaacson, Einstein, 454.
             36.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 455, 626n19.
             37.  Bernstein, Quantum Proﬁles, 84.
             38.  Gleiser, Island of Knowledge, 214.
             39.  Ibid., 211.
             40.  Knight, “Entangled Photons Secure Money Transfer.”
             41.  Gleiser, Island of Knowledge, 215– 16.
             42.  Feynman, Leighton, and Sands, Feynman Lectures on Physics, 3:18.3.
             43.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 295.
             44. Verfassung des Deutschen Reiches vom 11. August 1919, 89 (article 9.2), trans-
                lation from Kaes, Jay, and Dimendberg, Weimar Republic Sourcebook, 48.
             45.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 150.
             46.  See Cassidy, Uncertainty, 303, 599n20.
             47.  Pauli, Wissenscha"licher Briefwechsel, 2:168, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 307.
             48.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 307.
             49.  Lindley, Uncertainty, 173.
             50.  See Cassidy, Uncertainty, 310, 601n52.
             51.  Ibid., 310, 602n53.
             52.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 324.
             53.  Ibid., 330, 606n75.
             54.  Born, Born- Einstein Letters, 158.
             55.  Greene, Fabric of the Cosmos, 117.
             56.  Gribbin, Schrödinger’s Kittens and the Search for Reality, 132.
             57.  Ibid., 135.

            5. SUB SPECIE AETERNITATIS
              1.  Kuehn, Kant, 222.
              2.  Ibid., 205.
              3.  See ibid., 206.
              4.  Reicke, Kantiana, 19, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 206.
              5.  Kuehn, Kant, 215.
              6.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:231, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 219.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   288                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           289

              7.  See Kuehn, Kant, 221, 476n125.
              8.  Ibid., 222.
              9.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:97, translation from Kant, Correspondence, 
                107– 8.
             10.  Kant, Briefwechsel, 110.
             11.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:149, translation altered from Cassirer, Kant’s 
                Life and Thought, 134.
             12.  Kant, Reﬂexionen, 2:4, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 
                112.
             13.  Geier, Kants Welt, 148.
             14.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:123, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 232.
             15.  Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 132.
             16.  Hume, Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, 77.
             17.  Ibid., 117.
             18.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 19:116– 17, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 201.
             19.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 19:103, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 202.
             20.  Geier, Kants Welt, 159.
             21.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:130, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life 
                and Thought, 127.
             22.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  10:130– 31,  translation  from  Cassirer, Kant’s 
                Life and Thought, 128.
             23.  Hume, Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, 117.
             24.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:131, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life 
                and Thought, 129.
             25.  Geier, Kants Welt, 161.
             26.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:123, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life 
                and Thought, 130.
             27.  Geier, Kants Welt, 170.
             28.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 3:181, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 317 (B258).
             29.  Borges, Obras,  1:91,  translation  from  Borges, “John  Wilkins’  Analytical 
                Language,” 231.
             30.  As Kant puts it in the Critique, this overstepping of reason “passes o7 the 
                constant logical subject of thinking as the cognition of a real subject of 
                inherence, with which we do not and cannot have the least acquaintance.” 
                Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:221, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 417 (A350).
             31.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 3:392, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 559 (A582/B610).
             32.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 3:392, translation from Kant, Critique of Pure 
                Reason, 559 (A582/B610).
             33.  Russell, Problems of Philosophy, 93.
             34.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 32.
             35.  Geier, Kants Welt, 144.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   289                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            290                          Notes 

             36.  Ibid., 147.
             37.  Ibid., 171.
             38.  See Kuehn, Kant, 270.
             39.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 10:391, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 270.
             40.  Hare, “Augustine, Kant, and the Moral Gap,” 254.
             41.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 6:37, translation from Kant, Religion Within the 
                Limits of Reason Alone, 32.
             42.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 6:40, translation from Kant, Religion Within the 
                Limits of Reason Alone, 40.
             43.  Hare, “Augustine, Kant, and the Moral Gap,” 252.
             44.  Augustine, Confessions,  2:244  (11.26  [33]),  translation  from  Chadwick, 
                Confessions, 240.

            6. IN THE BLINK OF AN EYE
              1.  Rubenstein, When Jesus Became God, 75– 81.
              2.  Ibid., 96.
              3.  Augustine, Confessions,  2:254  (11.29  [39]),  translation  from  Chadwick, 
                Confessions, 244.
              4.  See United States Conference of Catholic Bishops, “What We Believe.”
              5.  Hegel, Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 404– 5; Remes, Neoplatonism, 
                19.
              6.  Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie, 3:44, translation from 
                Hegel, Lectures on the History of Philosophy, 415.
              7.  Augustine, Confessions,  2:254  (11.29  [39]),  translation  from  Chadwick, 
                Confessions, 243– 44.
              8.  Augustine, Confessions, 2:254 (11.29 [39]), translation from Chadwick Con-
                fessions, 244.
              9.  Williamson, Borges, 207.
             10.  Plotinus, Enneads, 299.
             11.  Borges, Obras, 1:388, translation from Borges, “History of Eternity,” 136.
             12.  Borges, “History of Eternity,” 136.
             13.  Williamson, Borges, 217.
             14.  Ibid., 218.
             15.  Borges, Obras, 1:414, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 82.
             16.  Borges, Obras, 1:416, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 84.
             17.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 5:76– 77, translation from Kant, Practical Phi-
                losophy, 202.
             18.  Williamson, Borges, 51.
             19.  Ibid., 55.
             20.  Quoted in ibid., 58.
             21.  Ibid., 59.
             22.  Block de Behar, Borges, 95.
             23.  Ibid., 166.
             24.  Borges, Obra, 208, my translation.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   290                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           291

             25.  Eco, Search for the Perfect Language, 26.
             26.  Kaplan, Sefer Yetzirah, 124 (2.5), translation from Eco, Search for the Perfect 
                Language, 29.
             27.  Eco, Search for the Perfect Language, 29.
             28.  Williamson, Borges, 63– 65.
             29.  Borges, Obras, 1:666, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 283.
             30.  Borges, Obras, 1:661, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 277.
             31.  Borges, Obras, 1:664, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 280.
             32.  Borges, Obras, 1:666, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 282.
             33.  Borges, Obras, 1:666, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 282.
             34.  Borges, Obras, 1:666, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 283.
             35.  Borges, Obras, 1:667, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 283– 84.
             36.  Williamson, Borges, 295.
             37.  See ibid., 276.
             38.  See ibid., 279.
             39.  Ibid., 281.
             40.  Canto, Borges a contraluz, 96, translation from Williamson, Borges, 281.
             41.  Dante, Paradiso, 246– 47 (27.106– 7).
             42.  Ibid., 252– 53 (28.16– 21).
             43.  See Williamson, Borges, 282.
             44.  See ibid., 285.
             45.  Borges, Obras, 1:376, translation from Borges, “History of Eternity,” 124.
             46.  See Greene, Elegant Universe, 136.

            7. THE UNIVERSE !WHICH OTHERS CALL THE LIBRARY"
              1.  Lewis, Discarded Image, 118– 19.
              2.  Grant, “Cosmology,” 272. See also Aristotle, Physics, 312– 15 (4.212a.8– 31).
              3.  Lindberg, Beginnings of Western Science, 192.
              4.  Egginton, “On Dante, Hyperspheres, and the Curvature of the Medieval 
                Cosmos”; Duhem, Le système du monde, 6:166; Grant, “Cosmology,” 272–73. 
              5.  Lewis, Discarded Image, 116.
              6.  Dante, Paradiso, 244– 46 (27.68– 72). The translations here and following 
                are mostly adapted from Allen Mandelbaum with some ideas from James 
                Finn Cotter.
              7.  Ibid., 246 (27.100– 102).
              8.  Ibid., 246– 48 (27.106– 16).
              9.  Ibid., 254 (28.53– 54).
             10.  Borges, Aleph and Other Stories, 169.
             11.  Williamson, Borges, 230– 31.
             12.  Ibid., 238.
             13.  Borges, Obras, 1:446, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 91.
             14.  Borges, Obras, 1:449, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 94.
             15.  Borges, Obras, 1:446– 47, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 91.
             16.  Borges, Obras, 1:447, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 91.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   291                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            292                          Notes 

             17.  Borges, Obras, 1:447, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 91– 92.
             18.  Borges, Ficcionario, 127, translation from Borges, “Total Library,” 215.
             19.  Borges, Ficcionario,  127,  translation  from  Borges,  “Total  Library,”  215. 
                Borges attributes this to Aldous Huxley. The earliest instance I could ﬁnd 
                was our friend Arthur Eddington.
             20.  Borges, Obras, 1:385, translation from Borges, “Doctrine of Cycles,” 115.
             21.  Borges, Obras, 1:390, translation from Borges, “Doctrine of Cycles,” 120.
             22.  Borges, Obras, 1:391, translation from Borges, “Doctrine of Cycles,” 121.
             23.  Borges, Obras, 1:391, translation from Borges, “Doctrine of Cycles,” 122.
             24.  Williamson, Borges, 231.
             25.  Borges and Sorrentino, Siete conversaciones, 73, translation from William-
                son, Borges, 241.
             26.  Borges, Ficcionario, 129, translation from Borges, “Total Library,” 216.
             27.  See Williamson, Borges, 259.
             28.  Ibid., 260.
             29.  Ibid.
             30.  Ibid.
             31.  See ibid., 223, 344.
             32.  Ibid., 261.
             33.  Ibid., 265.
             34.  See Rodríguez Monegal, Jorge Luis Borges, 443.
             35.  Borges, Obras, 1:465, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 112.
             36.  Borges, Obras, 1:467, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 114.
             37.  Borges, Obras, 1:466, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 113.
             38.  Borges, Obras, 1:467, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 114– 15.
             39.  Bloch, Unimaginable Mathematics, 16.
             40.  Ibid., 18.
             41.  Ibid., 19– 20.
             42.  Borges, Obras, 1:465– 66, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 113.
             43.  Like the two- dimensional beings in Abbott’s 1884 Flatland.
             44.  Borges, Obras, 1:465, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 112.
             45.  Dante, Paradiso, 248 (27.109– 11), my translation.
             46.  Borges, Obras, 1:364, translation from Williamson, Borges, 214.
             47.  Borges, Obras, 1:468, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 115.
             48.  Borges, Obras, 1:469, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 116.
             49.  Borges, Obras, 1:469, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 117.
             50.  Borges, Obras, 1:470, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 117.
             51.  Borges, Obras, 1:470, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 118.

            8. GRAVITAS
              1.  E. Heisenberg, Inner Exile, 27– 28.
              2.  W. Heisenberg, Encounters with Einstein, 112.
              3.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:91, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 63.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   292                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           293

              4.  Isaacson, Einstein, 332.
              5.  Greene, Elegant Universe, 3.
              6.  Ibid., 129.
              7.  P. Frank, Einstein: Sein Leben und seine Zeit, 350, translation from P. Frank, 
                Einstein: His Life and Times, 216.
              8.  Einstein, Über  die  spezielle  und  die  allgemeine  Relativitätstheorie,  17– 18, 
                translation from Einstein, Relativity, 29.
              9.  Newton, Correspondence, 1688– 1694, 254.
             10.  Quoted from Isaacson, Einstein, 145.
             11.  Reid, Hilbert— Courant, 142. See also Isaacson, Einstein, 596n89.
             12.  Einstein, Über die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativitätstheorie, 49, transla-
                tion from Einstein, Relativity, 76.
             13.  Rosenthal- Schneider, Begegnungen mit Einstein, von Laue und Planck, 60, 
                translation from Rosenthal- Schneider, Reality and Scientiﬁc Truth, 74.
             14.  Rosenthal- Schneider, Begegnungen mit Einstein, von Laue und Planck, 60, 
                translation from Isaacson, Einstein, 259.
             15.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 251, 599n5.
             16.  As Einstein put it, “In the general theory of relativity, space and time can-
                not be deﬁned in such a way that di7erences of the spatial co- ordinates 
                can be directly measured by the unit measuring- rod, or di7erences in the 
                time co- ordinate by a standard clock.” Einstein, “Die Grundlage der allge-
                meinen  Relativitätstheorie,”  85–86,   translation  from  Einstein, “Founda-
                tion,” 117.
             17.  Einstein, “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie,” 86, transla-
                tion from Einstein, “Foundation,” 117.
             18.  Greene, Elegant Universe, 49– 51.
             19.  As per Garson O’Toole, this quip was ﬁrst written by Ray Cummings in a 
                1919 story called The Girl in the Golden Atom, and subsequently borrowed 
                by diverse ﬁgures from Sir Arthur Eddington to John Wheeler to Susan 
                Sontag; see O’Toole, “Time Is What Keeps Everything from Happening at 
                Once.” Sontag, it should be said, quoted it while reminiscing about late 
                nights as a philosophy student struggling with Kant.
             20.  Isaacson, Einstein, 223.
             21.  See Clark, Einstein, 200, 663n200.
             22.  Einstein, “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie,” 70, transla-
                tion from Einstein, Relativity, 108.
             23.  Einstein, “Cosmological Considerations on the General Theory of Relativ-
                ity,” 180.
             24.  See Isaacson, Einstein, 252, 599n8.
             25.  Einstein, “Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitätsthe-
                orie,” 139, translation from Einstein, “Cosmological Considerations on the 
                General Theory of Relativity,” 187– 88.
             26.  Einstein, Über die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativitätstheorie, 73, transla-
                tion from Einstein, Relativity, 112.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   293                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            294                          Notes 

             27.  Greene, Elegant Universe, 82.
             28.  Dante, Paradiso, 246 (27.100– 102), my translation.
             29.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:91, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 62.
             30.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:92, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 63.
             31.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:95, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 66.
             32.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:98, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 68.
             33.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:92, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 63.
             34.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:98, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 68.
             35.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond, 78.
             36.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:92, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 63.
             37.  W. Heisenberg, Gesammelte Werke, C3:98, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                Physics and Beyond, 68.
             38.  Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, 107.
             39.  Ibid.: “The universe doesn’t have just a single history, but every possible 
                history, each with its own probability; and our observations of its current 
                state a7ect its past and determine the di7erent histories of the universe, 
                just as the observations of the particles in the double-slit  experiment a7ect 
                the particles’ past.”
             40.  Ibid., 159.
             41.  Dante, Paradiso, 252– 53 (28.16– 21).
             42.  Hawking and Mlodinow, Grand Design, 172.
             43.  In Hawking’s view, “The universe appeared spontaneously, starting o7 in 
                every possible way.” Ibid., 174.
             44.  Gleiser, Tear at the Edge of Creation, 68.
             45.  Gleiser, Island of Knowledge, 79.
             46.  Borges, “John Wilkins’ Analytical Language,” 231.
             47.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond, 168.
             48.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 32.
             49.  Isaacson, Einstein, 238.
             50.  Ibid., 97– 98.

            9. MADE TO MEASURE
              1.  Landsman, “Fine- Tuning Argument.”
              2.  Ibid.
              3.  Ibid.
              4.  Rees, Before the Beginning, 259.
              5. Kenny, Five Ways, 96.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   294                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           295

              6.  Kant, Critique of the Power of Judgment, 245– 46 (5:374).
              7.  Kremer, Das Problem der Theodicee in der Philosophie und Literatur des 18. 
                Jahrhunderts mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Kant und Schiller, 95, translation 
                from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 338.
              8.  Voltaire, Candide, 2 (chap. 1).
              9.  Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory, 149.
             10.  Mendelssohn, Saemmtliche Werke, 6:vi, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 251.
             11.  Kuehn, Kant, 318– 19.
             12.  Ibid., 322.
             13.  Hamann, Briefwechsel, 7:148, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 323.
             14.  Kuehn, Kant, 323.
             15.  Hasse, Merkwürdige Äusserungen Kant’s von einem seiner Tischgenossen, 6– 7, 
                translation from Kuehn, Kant, 325.
             16.  Kuehn, Kant, 325.
             17.  Wegenstein, Conductor.
             18.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  5:363,  translation  from  Kant, Critique  of  the 
                Power of Judgment, 236.
             19.  Cassirer, Kants Leben und Lehre, 319.
             20.  Kant, Critique of the Power of Judgment, 97– 99 (5:212– 13).
             21.  Kuehn, Kant, 351.
             22.  Ibid., 353.
             23.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 8:249, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 354.
             24.  Kuehn, Kant, 354– 55.
             25.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 2:434, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and 
                Thought, 356.
             26.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 5:250, translation from Kant, Critique of Aes-
                thetic Judgement, 98.
             27.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 5:161, translation from Kant, Practical Philoso-
                phy, 269.
             28.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 5:360, translation from Kant, Critique of Teleo-
                logical Judgement, 4.
             29.  See  Rovelli’s  discussion  of  the  relational  interpretation  of  quantum 
                mechanics in Helgoland, as I also exposit in chapter 12.
             30.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C1:226,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Reality and Its Order, 29.
             31.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 5:388, translation from Kant, Critique of Teleo-
                logical Judgement, 38.

            10. FREE WILL
              1.  Boethius, Consolation, 398– 400 (bk. 5, prose 3), translation from Slavitt, 
                Consolation, 155.
              2.  Harris, Free Will, 4.
              3.  Ibid., 5.
              4.  Boethius, Consolation, 422 (bk. 5, prose 6), translation from Slavitt, Conso-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   295                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            296                          Notes 

                lation, 168.
              5.  Borges, Obras, 1:391, translation from Borges, “Doctrine of Cycles,” 122.
              6.  Kant, Gesammelte  Schri"en,  8:40,  translation  from  Kant, “Answer  to  the 
                Question,” 21.
              7.  See Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 376.
              8.  Ibid.
              9.  Ibid., 380.
             10.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 8:338, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and 
                Thought, 393.
             11.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:6, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and 
                Thought, 394.
             12.  Kuehn, Kant, 379.
             13.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:6, translation from Cassirer, Kant’s Life and 
                Thought, 394.
             14.  See Cassirer, Kant’s Life and Thought, 395.
             15.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:10, translation from Kant, “Conﬂict of the 
                Faculties,” 242.
             16.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 6:487, translation from Kant, Practical Philoso-
                phy, 599.
             17.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 7:19, translation from Kant, “Conﬂict of the 
                Faculties,” 242.
             18.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 6:213, translation from Kant, Practical Philoso-
                phy, 375.
             19.  In fact, recent research has shown that RP (readiness potential) is a factor 
                for arbitrary decisions but as much for deliberative ones, suggesting that 
                deliberation may escape our technological abilities to predict decisions. 
                See Maoz et al., “Neural Precursors of Decisions That Matter.”
             20.  Harris, Free Will, 4.
             21.  Strawson, “Your Move.”
             22.  Ibid.
             23.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:455, translation from Kant, Groundwork of the 
                Metaphysics of Morals, 59.
             24.  Harris, Free Will, 3.
             25.  Ibid., 4.
             26.  Greene, Until the End of Time, 147.
             27.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:455, translation from Kant, Groundwork of the 
                Metaphysics of Morals, 60.
             28.  Greene, Until the End of Time, 149.
             29.  Ibid., 150.
             30.  As J. T. Ismael has noted, this way of thinking is not shared by most sci-
                entists, but it is more common among philosophers and cosmologists. As 
                she puts it, because this kind of thinking is focused on the emergent “laws 
                that describe the universe as a whole,” as opposed to local laws describing 
                behavior  in  open  systems, they  (philosophers  and  cosmologists) “invert 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   296                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           297

                the order of determination and reify the laws, so that now it looks like the 
                laws are not simply descriptions of a pattern” but “iron rails.” Ismael, How 
                Physics Makes Us Free, 110– 11.
             31.  Kant, Gesammelte Schri"en, 4:457, translation from Kant, Groundwork of the 
                Metaphysics of Morals, 61.
             32.  García Márquez, Cien años de soledad, 49, my translation.
             33.  Warda, “Ergänzungen zu E. Fromm’s zweitem und drittem Beitrage zur 
                Lebensgeschichte Kants,” 78, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 386.
             34.  See Abegg, Reisetagebuch von 1798, 186– 91, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 
                392.
             35.  Vaihinger, “Briefe aus dem Kantkreis,” 290, translation from Kuehn, Kant, 
                410.
             36.  Warda, Briefe an und von Johann George Sche!ner, 2:424, translation from 
                Kuehn, Kant, 410.
             37.  Jachmann, Immanuel Kant geschildert in Briefen an einen Freund, 196, trans-
                lation from Kuehn, Kant, 415.
             38.  Wasianski, Immanuel  Kant  in  seinen  letzten  Lebensjahren,  48,  translation 
                from Kuehn, Kant, 416.
             39.  Kuehn, Kant, 417.
             40.  Kuehn, Kant, 422. Literally, the German reads, “It is good.”
             41.  Borges, Obras, 1:490, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 137.
             42.  Wasianski, Immanuel  Kant  in  seinen  letzten  Lebensjahren,  51,  translation 
                from Kuehn, Kant, 416.
             43.  Bruner, “Foreword,” xxii.

            11. FORKING PATHS
              1.  Carroll, Something Deeply Hidden, 113.
              2.  See Byrne, Many Worlds of Hugh Everett III, 171.
              3.  Carroll, Something Deeply Hidden, 135.
              4.  The  physics  community  seems  to  have  found  out  about  Borges’s  story 
                in 1972. See DeWitt and Graham, Many- Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
                Mechanics, iv– vi. See also Rojo, “Garden of the Forking Worlds.”
              5.  Borges, Obras, 1:477, 479, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 125, 
                127.
              6.  Borges, Obras, 1:478, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 126.
              7.  Borges, Obras, 1:479, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 127.
              8.  Borges, Collected Fictions, 128.
              9.  Williamson, Borges, 345.
             10.  Ibid., 348.
             11.  Personal anecdote recounted to the author by Vicchio.
             12.  Williamson, Borges, 374.
             13.  Ibid., 375.
             14.  Ibid., 391.
             15.  Gómez López- Quiñones, Borges y el nazismo, 103, translation from Wil-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   297                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            298                          Notes 

                liamson, Borges, 256.
             16.  Williamson, Borges, 271.
             17.  See ibid., 409, 528n12.
             18.  See ibid., 410, 528n14.
             19.  See ibid., 410, 528n15.
             20.  Teitelboim, Los dos Borges, 216, translation from Williamson, Borges, 422.
             21.  Williamson, Borges, 425.
             22.  Frost, Complete Poems, 131.
             23.  Borges, Obras, 1:364, translation from Williamson, Borges, 214.
             24.  Mateo, El otro Borges, 200, translation from Williamson, Borges, 454.
             25.  See Williamson, Borges, 454, 532n2.
             26.  See ibid., 458, 533n15.
             27.  Slavuski, “The Old Man and the City,” 11.
             28.  See Williamson, Borges, 454, 532n5.
             29.  Harris, Free Will, 4.
             30.  Williamson, Borges, 370.
             31.  Ibid., 388.
             32.  Alifano, Borges, 128, translation from Williamson, Borges, 395.
             33.  Williamson, Borges, 395.
             34.  Borges, Obras, 3:50, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 457.
             35.  Borges, Obras, 3:49, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 457.
             36.  Borges, Obras, 3:50, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 458.
             37.  Borges, Obras, 3:51, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 459.
             38.  Borges, Obras, 2:197, translation from Borges, Collected Fictions, 324.
             39.  I owe the term to the physicist Andrei Linde, who explained it to me over 
                dinner while making matchsticks jump from his hands in an ostensible 
                demonstration of quantum ﬂuctuations.

            12. PUTTING THE DEMON TO REST
              1.  Dawido7, Catcher Was a Spy, 72.
              2.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 492.
              3.  Ibid., 498.
              4.  See Cassidy, Beyond Uncertainty, 367, 453n31.
              5.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 499.
              6.  Goudsmit, Alsos, 48.
              7.  The size of that di7erence is as tiny as the fact of it is huge: i x h-bar, or the 
                square root of - 1 (an imaginary number) multiplied by Planck’s constant 
                divided by 2π.
              8.  Feynman, Character of Physical Law, 129.
              9.  Borges, Obras, 1:258, translation from Borges, “Avatars of the Tortoise,” 202.
             10.  See Rovelli, Helgoland, 75.
             11.  See ibid., 83.
             12.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 255.
             13.  See ibid., 256, 592n29.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   298                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                          Notes                           299

             14.  Heisenberg, “Die  Kausalgesetz  und  Quantenmechanik,” 181,  translation 
                from  Camilleri, Heisenberg  and  the  Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics, 
                135, italics added.
             15.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C3:164,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 118.
             16.  These  exchanges  are  as  recalled  by  Heisenberg  in  his  memoir;  see  W. 
                Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond, 118– 19.
             17.  Ibid.,  119– 20.  Heisenberg’s  explanation  is  a  little  murky,  so  I’ve  para-
                phrased it here.
             18.  Ibid., 122.
             19.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C3:171,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 123.
             20.  While Heisenberg continued to believe that modern physics had moved 
                the needle on what counted as a priori in terms of our ability to know, 
                his interactions with Hermann and Weizsäcker clearly had an e7ect. He 
                told Bohr as much in a letter shortly a.er the visit, and he would go on 
                to write in an article the following year that Kant’s forms of intuition and 
                the law of causality underlay every experiment in modern physics, and 
                indeed without them no inference concerning the properties of observed 
                objects could ever be made. See W. Heisenberg, Physics and Beyond, 123; 
                and  Camilleri, Heisenberg  and  the  Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics, 
                142– 43.
             21.  Weizsäcker himself was critical that Cassirer had gone too far down the 
                road of logical empiricism, hence sacriﬁcing much of what Kant’s thought 
                had enabled; see Camilleri, Heisenberg and the Interpretation of Quantum 
                Mechanics, 143. Indeed, as Stephan Körner writes in his introduction to 
                Cassirer’s timeless exposé of Kant’s life and thought, many philosophers 
                believed and continue to believe that the discoveries of general relativity 
                and  quantum  mechanics  were “incompatible  with  the  Kantian  a  priori 
                principles of causality and continuity”; Körner, “Introduction,” ix– x.
             22.  W. Heisenberg, Physics and Philosophy, 90.
             23.  Ibid., 64.
             24.  Ibid., 101. And yet even while overlooking that Kant had, in fact, foreseen 
                the very paradox that quantum mechanics codiﬁed, when considering the 
                question of the shape of the cosmos, Heisenberg saw that same paradox 
                in its cosmological version and called it by its name, antinomy. See ibid., 
                124: “Space cannot be ﬁnite, since we cannot imagine that there should 
                be an end to space; to whichever point in space we come we can always 
                imagine that we can go beyond.” Having recognized the antinomy of the 
                edge of the universe, Heisenberg would need only to connect the dots to 
                see that the wrench in the wheel of full correspondence between quantum 
                mechanics and Kant’s system was, in fact, already part of that system.
             25.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C3:171,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 123.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   299                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            300                          Notes 

             26.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C3:171,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 123.
             27.  C. Frank, Operation Epsilon, 78.
             28.  Frayn, Copenhagen,  36.  Frayn’s  dialogue  is  based  on  Heisenberg’s  own 
                reconstructions in his memoirs, so the phrasing of this famous question is 
                clouded by multiple layers of guesswork.
             29.  W.  Heisenberg,  “Über  die  Arbeiten  zur  technischen  Ausnutzung  der 
                Atomkernenergie in Deutschland,” 327, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 510.
             30.  W.  Heisenberg,  “Über  die  Arbeiten  zur  technischen  Ausnutzung  der 
                Atomkernenergie in Deutschland,” 327, translation from W. Heisenberg, 
                “Research in Germany on the Technical Application of Atomic Energy,” 
                213.
             31.  W.  Heisenberg,  “Über  die  Arbeiten  zur  technischen  Ausnutzung  der 
                Atomkernenergie in Deutschland,” 329, translation from Cassidy, Uncer-
                tainty, 510.
             32.  Morrison, “Alsos,” 365.
             33.  E.  Heisenberg, Das  politische  Leben  eines  Unpolitischen,  134,  translation 
                from E. Heisenberg, Inner Exile, 109.
             34.  E. Heisenberg, Inner Exile, 109.
             35.  Goudsmit, Alsos, 121.
             36.  Goudsmit, Alsos, 115.
             37.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 519; see also 638n62.
             38.  Ibid., 531.
             39.  W. Heisenberg, “Nature of Elementary Particles,” 38.
             40.  W.  Heisenberg, Gesammelte  Werke,  C3:330,  translation  from  W.  Heisen-
                berg, Physics and Beyond, 244.
             41.  Cassidy, Uncertainty, 522.

            POSTSCRIPT
              1.  See Rovelli, Helgoland, 182.
              2.  See ibid., 137.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   300                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only


                                BIBLIOGRAPHY


            Abegg,  Johann  Friedrich. Reisetagebuch  von  1798.  Edited  by  Walter  Abegg, 
                Jolanda Abegg, and Zwi Batscha. Frankfurt: Insel, 1976.
            Alifano, Roberto. Borges, biografía verbal. Barcelona: Plaza & Janes, 1988.
            Anderson,  Abraham. Kant, Hume,  and  the  Interruption  of  Dogmatic  Slumber. 
                Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020.
            Andrés, Alfredo. Palabras con Leopoldo Marechal. Buenos Aires: Carlos Pérez, 
                1968.
            Aristotle. The  Physics.  Translated  and  edited  by  Philip  Henry  Wicksteed  and 
                Francis  Macdonald  Cornford.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University 
                Press, 1929– 34.
            Augustine. Confessions.  Translated  and  edited  by  Carolyn  Hammond.  Cam-
                bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2014.
            Bastos, María Luisa. Borges ante la crítica argentina, 1923–1960.  Buenos Aires: 
                Ediciones Hispamérica, 1974.
            Bernstein, Jeremy. Quantum Proﬁles. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 
                1991.
            Bloch, William Goldbloom. The Unimaginable Mathematics of Borges’s Library of 
                Babel. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.
            Block de Behar, Lisa. Borges, the Passion of an Endless Quotation. Translated by 
                William Egginton and Christopher RayAlexander. 2nd ed. Albany: State 
                University of New York Press, 2014.
            Boethius, Anicius Manlius Severinus. The Consolation of Philosophy. Translated 
                by S. J. Tester. In Theological Tractates; The Consolation of Philosophy, 2nd ed., 
                130– 435. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1973.
            Bohr,  Niels. “Can  Quantum-Mechanical   Description  of  Physical  Reality  Be 
                Considered Complete?” Physical Review 48, no. 8 (1935): 696– 702.
            — — — . Foundations of Quantum Physics I (1926– 1932). Translated and edited by 
                Jørgen Kalckar. Vol. 6 of Collected Works, edited by Erik Rüdinger. Amster-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   301                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            302                       Bibliography 

                dam: North- Holland, 1985.
            Borges,  Jorge  Luis. The  Aleph  and  Other  Stories,  1933–1969.   Translated  and 
                edited by Norman Thomas Di Giovanni. New York: Bantam, 1970.
            — — — . “Avatars of the Tortoise.” Translated by James East Irby. In Labyrinths: 
                Selected Stories and Other Writings, edited by Donald Alfred Yates and James 
                East Irby, 196–202.  New York: New Directions, 1962.
            — — — . Collected Fictions. Translated and edited by Andrew Hurley. New York: 
                Penguin, 1998.
            — — — . “A Defense of the Kabbalah.” Translated by Eliot Weinberger. In Selected 
                Non- ﬁctions, 83– 86.
            — — — . “The Doctrine of Cycles.” Translated by Esther Allen. In Selected Non- 
                ﬁctions, 115– 22.
            — — — . Ficcionario: Una antologiá  de sus textos. Edited by Emir Rodríguez Mon-
                egal. Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1985.
            — — — . “A History  of  Eternity.” Translated  by  Esther  Allen.  In Selected  Non- 
                ﬁctions, 123– 39.
            — — — . El idioma de los argentinos. Buenos Aires: Seix Barral, 1994.
            — — — . Inquisiciones. Buenos Aires: Proa, 1925.
            — — — . “John Wilkins’ Analytical Language.” Translated by Eliot Weinberger. 
                In Selected Non- ﬁctions, 229– 32.
            — — — . “The Nothingness of Personality.” Translated by Esther Allen. In Selected 
                Non- ﬁctions, 3– 9.
            — — — . Obra poética, 1923– 1977. 2nd ed. Buenos Aires: Emecé, 1981.
            — — — . Obras completas. Edited by Carlos V. Frías. Buenos Aires: Emecé, 1996.
            — — — .  “The  Perpetual  Race  of  Achilles  and  the  Tortoise.”  Translated  by 
                Suzanne Jill Levine. In Selected Non- ﬁctions, 44– 47.
            — — — . Selected Non- ﬁctions. Edited by Eliot Weinberger. New York: Penguin, 
                1999.
            — — — . El tamaño de mi esperanza. 2nd ed. Buenos Aires: Seix Barral, 1993.
            — — — . “The Total Library.” Translated by Eliot Weinberger. In Selected Non- 
                ﬁctions, 214– 16.
            Borges, Jorge Luis, and Antonio Carrizo. Borges el memorioso: Conversaciones. 
                Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica, 1982.
            Borges, Jorge Luis, and Fernando Sorrentino. Siete conversaciones. Buenos Aires: 
                Casa Pardo, 1973.
            Born, Max. My Life: Recollections of a Nobel Laureate. Edited by Gustav Born. 
                New York: Scribner’s, 1975.
            — — — . “Zur  Quantenmechanik  der  Stoßvorgänge.” Zeitschri"  für  Physik  37, 
                no. 12 (1926): 863– 67.
            — — — ,  ed. Born- Einstein Letters:  Correspondence  Between  Albert  Einstein  and 
                Max and Hedwig Born from 1916 to 1955. Translated by Irene Born. Lon-
                don: Macmillan, 1971.
            Born, Max, and Werner Heisenberg. “La mécanique des quanta.” In Lorentz, 
                Électrons et photons, 143– 81.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   302                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                      Bibliography                        303

            Borowski, Ludwig Ernst. Darstellung des Lebens und Charakters Immanuel Kants. 
                Königsberg: Friedrich Nicolovius, 1804.
            Bruner, Jerome Seymour. “Foreword to the First Edition.” In Luria, Mind of a 
                Mnemonist, xxi– xxv.
            Bryson, Bill. One Summer: America, 1927. New York: Anchor, 2014.
            Byrne, Peter. The  Many  Worlds of  Hugh  Everett  III:  Multiple  Universes, Mutual 
                Assured Destruction, and the Meltdown of a Nuclear Family. Oxford: Oxford 
                University Press, 2010.
            Cale, George. “The Anthropic Principle.” Scientiﬁc American 245, no. 6 (1981): 
                154– 71.
            Camilleri,  Kristian. Heisenberg  and  the  Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics. 
                Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
            Canto, Estela. Borges a contraluz. Madrid: Espasa- Calpe, 1989.
            Carroll, Sean. From Eternity to Here: The Search for the Ultimate Meaning of Time. 
                New York: Dutton, 2010.
            — — — . Something Deeply Hidden: Quantum Worlds and the Emergence of Space-
                time. New York: Dutton, 2019.
            Cassidy, David Charles. Beyond Uncertainty: Heisenberg, Quantum Physics, and 
                the Bomb. New York: Bellevue Literary Press, 2009.
            — — — . Uncertainty: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. New York: Free-
                man, 1992.
            Cassirer, Ernst. Kants Leben und Lehre. Berlin: Bruno Cassirer, 1921.
            — — — . Kant’s  Life  and  Thought.  Translated  by  James  Haden.  New  Haven, 
                Conn.: Yale University Press, 1981.
            Chadwick, Henry, trans. and ed. Confessions, by Augustine. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
                versity Press, 1991.
            Clark, Ronald William. Einstein: The Life and Times. New York: World, 1971.
            Dante Alighieri. The Divine Comedy. Translated by James Finn Cotter. Stony 
                Brook, N.Y.: Forum Italicum, 2006.
            — — — . Paradiso. Translated by Allen Mandelbaum. Edited by Anthony Old-
                corn, Daniel Feldman, and Giuseppe Di Scipio. New York: Bantam, 1986.
            Dawido7, Nicholas. The Catcher Was a Spy: The Mysterious Life of Moe Berg. New 
                York: Pantheon, 1994.
            DeWitt, Bryce Seligman, and Neill Graham, eds. The Many- Worlds Interpreta-
                tion  of  Quantum  Mechanics:  A  Fundamental  Exposition.  Princeton,  N.J.: 
                Princeton University Press, 1973.
            Dresden,  Max. H.  A.  Kramers:  Between  Tradition  and  Revolution.  New  York: 
                Springer, 1987.
            Duhem, Pierre. Le système du monde: Histoire de doctrines cosmologiques de Platon 
                à Copernic. Paris: Hermann, 1913– 59.
            Eco, Umberto. The Search for the Perfect Language. Translated by James Fentress. 
                Oxford: Blackwell, 1995.
            Eddington, Arthur Stanley. The Nature of the Physical World. New York: Macmil-
                lan, 1928.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   303                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            304                       Bibliography 

            Egginton, William. “On Dante, Hyperspheres, and the Curvature of the Medi-
                eval Cosmos.” Journal of the History of Ideas 60, no. 2 (1999): 195– 216.
            Einstein, Albert. “Autobiographisches.” In Albert Einstein: Philosopher- Scientist, 
                edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 1– 95. New York: MJF, 1949.
            — — — . The  Berlin  Years:  Writings  and  Correspondence,  June  1925– May  1927. 
                Edited by Diana Kormos Buchwald, József Illy, A. J. Knox, Dennis Lehm-
                kuhl,  Ze’ev  Rosenkranz,  and  Jennifer  Nollar  James.  Vol.  15  of Collected 
                Papers. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
            — — — . “Cosmological Considerations on the General Theory of Relativity.” In 
                Sommerfeld, Principle of Relativity, 177– 88.
            — — — . “The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity.” In Sommerfeld, 
                Principle of Relativity, 109– 64.
            — — — . “Die Grundlage der allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie.” In Sommerfeld, 
                Das Relativitätsprinzip, 81– 124.
            — — — . “Kosmologische  Betrachtungen  zur  allgemeinen  Relativitätstheorie.” 
                In Sommerfeld, Das Relativitätsprinzip, 130– 39.
            — — — . “On a Heuristic Point of View About the Creation and Conversion of 
                Light.” In The Old Quantum Theory, edited and translated by Dirk Ter Haar, 
                91– 107. Oxford: Pergamon, 1967.
            — — — . “Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases. Zweite Abhandlung.” 
                Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenscha"en 1 (1925): 3–14. 
            — — — . Relativity: The Special and the General Theory. Translated by Robert W. 
                Lawson. London: Routledge, 1993.
            — — — .  “Remarks  to  the  Essays  Appearing  in  This  Co- operative  Volume.” 
                Translated by Paul Arthur Schilpp. In Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist,  
                edited by Paul Arthur Schilpp, 663– 88. New York: MJF, 1949.
            — — — . The Swiss Years: Writings, 1900–1909.  Edited by John Stachel. Vol. 2 of 
                Collected Papers. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1989.
            — — — . Über die spezielle und die allgemeine Relativitätstheorie. Berlin: Springer, 
                2001.
            Epstein, Klaus. The Genesis of German Conservatism. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
                University Press, 1966.
            Feynman, Richard. The Character of Physical Law. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 
                1967.
            Feynman, Richard, Robert Leighton, and Matthew Sands. The Feynman Lectures 
                on Physics. New York: Basic, 2010.
            Forman, Paul. “Alfred Landé and the Anomalous Zeeman E7ect, 1919– 1921.” 
                Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences 2 (1970): 153– 261.
            Frank, Charles, ed. Operation Epsilon: The Farm Hall Transcripts. Bristol: Institute 
                of Physics Publishing, 1993.
            Frank, Philipp. Einstein: His Life and Times. Translated by George Rosen. Edited 
                by Shuichi Kusaka. New York: Knopf, 1947.
            — — — . Einstein: Sein Leben und seine Zeit. Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1979.
            Frayn, Michael. Copenhagen. New York: Anchor Books, 1998.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   304                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                      Bibliography                        305

            Frost, Robert. Complete Poems. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1949.
            García Márquez, Gabriel. Cien años de soledad. Madrid: Alfaguara, 1982.
            García Márquez, Gabriel, and Plinio Apuleyo Mendoza. The Fragrance of Guava. 
                Translated by Ann Wright. London: Verso, 1983.
            — — — . El olor de la guayaba: Conversaciones. Bogotá: Oveja Negra, 1982.
            Geier, Manfred. Kants Welt: Eine Biographie. Hamburg: Rowohlt, 2004.
            Gleiser, Marcelo. The Island of Knowledge: The Limits of Science and the Search for 
                Meaning. New York: Basic Books, 2014.
            — — — . The Tear at the Edge of Creation: A Radical New Vision for Life in an Imper-
                fect Universe. New York: Free Press, 2010.
            Gómez  López- Quiñones,  Antonio. Borges  y  el  nazismo:  Sur  (1937–1946).  
                Granada: Universidad de Granada, 2004.
            Goudsmit, Samuel A. Alsos. Woodbury, N.Y.: AIP Press, 1996.
            Grant, Edward. “Cosmology.” In Science in the Middle Ages, edited by David C. 
                Lindberg, 265– 302. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1978.
            Greene,  Brian. The  Elegant  Universe:  Superstrings,  Hidden  Dimensions,  and  the 
                Quest for the Ultimate Theory. New York: Vintage, 1999.
            — — — . The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of Reality. New 
                York: Random House, 2004.
            — — — . Until the End of Time: Mind, Matter, and Our Search for Meaning in an 
                Evolving Cosmos. New York: Knopf, 2020.
            Gribbin,  John. In  Search  of  Schrödinger’s  Cat:  Quantum  Physics  and  Reality. 
                Toronto: Bantam, 1984.
            — — — . Schrödinger’s Kittens and the Search for Reality. London: Weidenfeld & 
                Nicolson, 1995.
            Hamann, Johann Georg. Briefwechsel. Edited by Walther Ziesemer and Arthur 
                Henkel. Frankfurt am Main: Insel, 1955– 79.
            Hare, John. “Augustine, Kant, and the Moral Gap.” In The Augustinian Tradition, 
                edited  by  Gareth  Matthews,  251– 62.  Berkeley:  University  of  California 
                Press, 1999.
            Harris, Sam. Free Will. New York: Free Press, 2012.
            Hasse, Johann Gottfried. Merkwürdige Äusserungen Kant’s von einem seiner Tisch-
                genossen. Königsberg: Gottlieb Lebrecht, 1804.
            Hawking, Stephen, and Leonard Mlodinow. The Grand Design. New York: Ban-
                tam, 2010.
            Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. Greek Philosophy to Plato. Translated by Eliza-
                beth  Sanderson  Haldane.  Vol.  1  of Lectures  on  the  History  of  Philosophy. 
                Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1995.
            — — — . Plato  and  the  Platonists.  Translated  by  Elizabeth  Sanderson  Haldane 
                and Frances Simson. Vol. 2 of Lectures on the History of Philosophy. Lincoln: 
                University of Nebraska Press, 1995.
            — — — . Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Edited by Karl Ludwig 
                Michelet. 2nd ed. Berlin: Duncker und Humblot, 1840– 44.
            Heisenberg, Elisabeth. Inner Exile: Recollections of a Life with Werner Heisenberg. 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   305                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            306                       Bibliography 

                Translated by S. Cappellari and C. Morris. Boston: Birkhäuser, 1980.
            — — — . Das politische Leben eines Unpolitischen: Erinnerungen an Werner Heisen-
                berg. Munich: Piper, 1980.
            Heisenberg, Werner. “The Development of the Interpretation of the Quantum 
                Theory.” In Niels Bohr and the Development of Physics: Essays Dedicated to 
                Niels Bohr on the Occasion of His Seventieth Birthday, edited by Wolfgang 
                Pauli, 12– 29. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1955.
            — — — . Encounters with Einstein: And Other Essays About People, Places, and Par-
                ticles. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1983.
            — — — . Gesammelte Werke / Collected Works. Edited by Walter Blum, Hans- Peter 
                Dürr, and Helmut Rechenberg. Berlin: Springer/Piper, 1984– 89.
            — — — . “Die Kausalgesetz und Quantenmechanik.” Erkenntnis 2 (1931): 172–82. 
            — — — . “The Nature of Elementary Particles.” Physics Today 29, no. 3 (1976): 
                32– 39.
            — — — . Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations. Translated by Arnold 
                Julius Pomerans. New York: Harper & Row, 1971.
            — — — . Physics  and  Philosophy:  The  Revolution  in  Modern  Science.  New  York: 
                HarperCollins, 2007.
            — — — . Reality  and  Its  Order.  Translated  by  Martin  B.  Rumscheidt,  Nancy 
                Lukens,  and  Irene  Heisenberg.  Edited  by  Konrad  Kleinknecht.  Cham: 
                Springer, 2019.
            — — — . “Research in Germany on the Technical Application of Atomic Energy.” 
                Nature 160, no. 4059 (1947): 211– 15.
            — — — . Der Teil und das Ganze: Gespräche im Umkreis der Atomphysik. Munich: 
                Piper Taschenbuch, 2009.
            — — — . “Über die Arbeiten zur technischen Ausnutzung der Atomkernenergie 
                in Deutschland.” Naturwissenscha"en 33, no. 11 (1946): 325– 29.
            Henderson, Bob. “The Rebel Physicist on the Hunt for a Better Story Than 
                Quantum  Mechanics.” New  York  Times  Magazine,  June  25,  2020.  www 
                .nytimes .com.
            Hentschel, Ann M., and Jennifer Nollar James, trans. The Berlin Years: Writings 
                and Correspondence, April 1923– May 1925, by Albert Einstein. Edited by 
                Diana Kormos Buchwald, József Illy, Ze’ev Rosenkranz, Tilman Sauer, and 
                Osik Moses. Vol. 14 of Collected Papers. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
                sity Press, 2015.
            Hermann,  Armin. Frühgeschichte  der  Quantentheorie  (1899– 1913).  Mosbach: 
                Physik, 1969.
            — — — . Werner Heisenberg in Selbstzeugnissen und Bilddokumenten. Hamburg: 
                Rowohlt, 1976.
            Hippel the Elder, Gottlieb von. Biographie des Königl. Preuss. Geheimenkriegsraths 
                zu Königsberg. Gotha: Justus Perthes, 1801.
            Homer. The Odyssey. Translated by A. T. Murray. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
                vard University Press, 1919.
            Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. Edited by Tom 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   306                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                      Bibliography                        307

                Beauchamp. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
            — — — . A  Treatise  of  Human  Nature.  Edited  by  Lewis  Amherst  Selby-Bigge.  
                Oxford: Clarendon, 1888.
            Isaacson, Walter. Einstein: His Life and Universe. New York: Simon & Schuster, 
                2008.
            Ismael, J. T. How Physics Makes Us Free. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.
            Jachmann, Reinhold Bernhard, ed. Immanuel Kant geschildert in Briefen an einen 
                Freund. Königsberg: Friedrich Nicolovius, 1804.
            Jauch, Josef Maria. Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Reading, Mass.: Addison- 
                Wesley, 1968.
            Johnson, Reed. “The Mystery of S., the Man with an Impossible Memory.” New 
                Yorker, Aug. 12, 2017. www .newyorker.com. 
            Kaes, Anton, Martin Jay, and Edward Dimendberg, trans. and ed. The Weimar 
                Republic Sourcebook. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994.
            Kant,  Immanuel. “An Answer  to  the  Question:  What  Is  Enlightenment?” In 
                Practical Philosophy, translated and edited by Mary J. Gregor, 15– 22. Cam-
                bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
            — — — . Briefwechsel. Edited by Rudolf Malter. Hamburg: Meiner, 1986.
            — — — . “The Conﬂict of the Faculties.” Translated by Mary J. Gregor and Rob-
                ert Anchor. In Religion and Rational Theology, 237– 327. Cambridge, U.K.: 
                Cambridge University Press, 1996.
            — — — . Correspondence. Translated and edited by Arnulf Zweig. Cambridge, 
                U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
            — — — . Critique of Aesthetic Judgement. Translated and edited by James Creed 
                Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon, 1911.
            — — — . Critique of the Power of Judgment. Translated by Paul Guyer and Eric 
                Matthews. Edited by Paul Guyer. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University 
                Press, 2000.
            — — — . The Critique of Pure Reason. Translated and edited by Paul Guyer and 
                Allen William Wood. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
            — — — . Critique of Teleological Judgement. Translated and edited by James Creed 
                Meredith. Oxford: Clarendon, 1928.
            — — — . Gesammelte Schri"en. Berlin: Reimer/de Gruyter, 1902– 97.
            — — — . Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. Translated and edited by Mary 
                J. Gregor. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
            — — — . Practical  Philosophy.  Translated  and  edited  by  Mary  J.  Gregor.  Cam-
                bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
            — — — . Reﬂexionen Kants zur kritischen Philosophie: Aus Kants handschri"lichen 
                Aufzeichnungen. Edited by Benno Erdmann. Leipzig: Fues, 1884.
            — — — . Religion  Within  the  Limits  of  Reason  Alone.  Translated  and  edited  by 
                Theodore Meyer Greene and Hoyt Hopewell Hudson. 2nd ed. New York: 
                Harper & Row, 1960.
            — — — . Theoretical Philosophy, 1755– 1770. Translated by David Walford. Edited 
                by David Walford and Ralf Meerbote. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Uni-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   307                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            308                       Bibliography 

                versity Press, 1992.
            Kaplan, Aryeh, ed. Sefer Yetzirah: The Book of Creation in Theory and Practice. 2nd 
                ed. York Beach, Maine: Weiser, 1997.
            Kenny,  Anthony. The  Five  Ways:  St.  Thomas  Aquinas’ Proofs  of  God’s  Existence. 
                London: Routledge, 1969.
            Kirchho7, Gustav. “On the Relation Between the Emissive and the Absorptive 
                Power of Bodies for Heat and Light.” In The Laws of Radiation and Absorp-
                tion: Memoirs by Prévost, Stewart, Kirchho!, and Kirchho! and Bunsen, trans-
                lated and edited by De Witt Bristol Brace, 73–97.  New York: American 
                Book Company, 1901.
            — — — . “Ueber das Verhältniss zwischen dem Emissionsvermögen und dem 
                Absorptionsvermögen  der  Körper  für  Wärme  und  Licht.” Annalen  der 
                Physik und Chemie 185, no. 2 (1860): 275– 301.
            Knight,  Will.  “Entangled  Photons  Secure  Money  Transfer.” New  Scientist, 
                April 22, 2004. www .newscientist .com.
            Körner, Stephan. “Introduction to the English Edition.” In Cassirer, Kant’s Life 
                and Thought, vii– xxi.
            Kremer, Josef. Das Problem der Theodicee in der Philosophie und Literatur des 18. 
                Jahrhunderts mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Kant und Schiller. Berlin: Reuther 
                & Reichard, 1909.
            Kuehn, Manfred. Kant: A Biography. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
                2001.
            Landsman, Klaas. “The Fine- Tuning Argument: Exploring the Improbability 
                of Our Existence.” In The Challenge of Chance: A Multidisciplinary Approach 
                from  Science  and  the  Humanities,  edited  by  Klaas  Landsman  and  Ellen 
                van Wolde, 111– 29. New York: Springer, 2016.
            Lewis,  Clive  Staples. The  Discarded  Image:  An  Introduction  to  Medieval  and 
                Renaissance Literature. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1964.
            Lindberg, David C. The Beginnings of Western Science. Chicago: University of 
                Chicago Press, 1992.
            Lindley, David. Uncertainty: Einstein, Heisenberg, Bohr, and the Struggle for the 
                Soul of Science. New York: Anchor, 2008.
            Lorentz, Hendrik, ed. Électrons et photons: Rapports et discussions du cinquième 
                Conseil de Physique tenu à Bruxelles du 24 au 29 octobre 1927 sous les auspices 
                de l’Institut International de Physique Solvay. Paris: Gauthier- Villars, 1928.
            Lorentz,  Hendrik,  Niels  Bohr,  Marcel  Brillouin,  Théophile  de  Donder,  Max 
                Born,  Albert  Einstein,  Wolfgang  Pauli,  Paul  Dirac,  Hendrik  Anthony 
                Kramers,  Werner  Heisenberg,  Louis  de  Broglie,  Auguste  Piccard,  Paul 
                Langevin, Ralph Fowler, Erwin Schrödinger, Paul Ehrenfest, Owen Rich-
                ardson, Irving Langmuir, and Arthur Compton. “Discussion générale des 
                idées nouvelles émises.” In Lorentz, Électrons et photons, 248– 89.
            Luria, Alexander. The Mind of a Mnemonist. Translated by Lynn Solotaro7. 2nd 
                ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1987.
            — — — . Romanticheskie ėsse: Malen’kaia︠  ︡ knizhka o bol’shoĭ pamia︠ ti;︡  Poteria︠ nny︡ ĭ 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   308                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                      Bibliography                        309

                i  vozvrashchennyĭ mir [Романтические эссе. Маленькая книжка о 
                большой  памяти;  Потерянный   и возвращенный   мир].  Moscow: 
                Pedagogica [Педагогика], 1996.
            Maoz, Uri, Gideon Ya7e, Christof Koch, and Liad Mudrik. “Neural Precursors 
                of  Decisions  That  Matter— an ERP  Study  of  Deliberate  and  Arbitrary 
                Choice.” ELife, Oct. 23, 2019. elifesciences .org.
            Mateo, Fernando, ed. El otro Borges: Entrevistas, 1960– 1986. Buenos Aires: Equis, 
                1997.
            Mehra, Jagdish, and Helmut Rechenberg. The Historical Development of Quan-
                tum Theory. New York: Springer, 1982– 2001.
            Mendelssohn, Moses. Saemmtliche Werke. Edited by Daniel Jenisch. Buda: Paul 
                Burian, 1819– 21.
            Mermin, N. David. “Can You Help Your Team Tonight by Watching on TV? 
                More Experimental Metaphysics from Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen.” In 
                Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reﬂections on Bell’s Theorem, 
                edited  by  James  Thomas  Cushing  and  Ernan  McMullin,  38– 59.  Notre 
                Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1989.
            — — — . “What’s Wrong with This Pillow?” Physics Today 42, no. 4 (April 1989): 
                9– 11.
            Minev,  Zlatko  Kristev,  Shantanu  Omprakash  Mundhada,  Shyam  Shankar, 
                Phil Reinhold, Ricardo Gutiérrez- Jáuregui, Robert J. Schoelkopf, Mazyar 
                Mirrahimi, Howard John Carmichael, and Michel H. Devoret. “To Catch 
                and Reverse a Quantum Jump Mid- ﬂight.” Nature 570, no. 7760 (2019): 
                200– 204.
            Morrison, Philip. “Alsos: The Story of German Science.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
                Scientists 3, no. 12 (1947).
            Nature. “New Problems in Quantum Theory.” 121, no. 3050 (1928): 579.
            Newton, Isaac. The Correspondence of Isaac Newton, Vol. 3, 1688– 1694. Edited by 
                Herbert Westren Turnbull. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 
                1961.
            New York Times. “Stimson Says Law Required Action.” Dec. 11, 1932, 3. nyti.ms  
                /3JV9VRJ.
            Osserman, Robert. Poetry of the Universe. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University 
                Press, 1996.
            O’Toole, Garson. “Time Is What Keeps Everything from Happening at Once.” 
                Quote Investigator, July 6, 2019. quoteinvestigator .com.
            Pauli, Wolfgang. Wissenscha"licher Briefwechsel mit Bohr, Einstein, Heisenberg u.a. 
                Edited by Karl von Meyenn, Armin Hermann, and Victor Frederick Weiss-
                kopf. New York: Springer, 1979– 2005.
            Peterson, Mark. “Dante and the 3- Sphere.” American Journal of Physics 47, no. 12 
                (1979): 1031– 35.
            Planck,  Max. “Zur  Theorie  des  Gesetzes  der  Energieverteilung  im  Normal-
                spectrum.” Verhandlungen der Deutschen Physikalischen Gesellscha" 2, no. 17 
                (1900): 235– 45.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   309                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            310                       Bibliography 

            Plato. Opera. Edited by John Burnet. Oxford: Clarendon, 1900– 1907.
            — — — . Parmenides. Translated by Mary Louise Gill and Paul Ryan. In Complete 
                Works,  edited  by  John  Madison  Cooper  and  D.  S.  Hutchinson,  359– 97. 
                Indianapolis: Hackett, 1997.
            — — — . Timaeus. Translated by Donald J. Zeyl. In Complete Works, edited by 
                John  Madison  Cooper  and  D.  S.  Hutchinson,  1224–91.   Indianapolis: 
                Hackett, 1997.
            Plotinus. The Enneads. Translated by Stephen MacKenna. Edited by John Dil-
                lon. Abridged ed. London: Penguin, 1991.
            Prudhomme, Paul. Fork in the Road: A Di!erent Direction in Cooking. New York: 
                William Morrow, 1993.
            Rees, Martin. Before the Beginning: Our Universe and Others. London: Simon & 
                Schuster, 1997.
            Reicke,  Rudolf. Kantiana:  Beiträge  zu  Immanuel  Kants  Leben  und  Schri"en. 
                Königsberg: Theile, 1860.
            Reid, Constance. Hilbert— Courant. New York: Springer, 1986.
            Remes, Pauliina. Neoplatonism. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008.
            Rink,  Friedrich  Theodor. Ansichten  aus  Immanuel  Kant’s  Leben.  Königsberg: 
                Göbbels und Unzer, 1805.
            Rodríguez Monegal, Emir. Jorge Luis Borges: A Literary Biography. New York: 
                E. P. Dutton, 1978.
            Rojo, Alberto G. “The Garden of the Forking Worlds: Borges and Quantum 
                Mechanics.” Oakland Journal 9 (2005): 69– 78. hdl .handle .net /10323 /7649.
            Rosenfeld, Léon. “Niels Bohr in the Thirties: Consolidation and the Extension 
                of the Conception of Complementarity.” In Niels Bohr: His Life and Work 
                as Seen by His Friends and Colleagues, edited by Stefan Rozental, 114–36.  
                Amsterdam: North- Holland, 1967.
            Rosenthal- Schneider,  Ilse. Begegnungen mit  Einstein,  von  Laue  und  Planck: 
                Realität und wissenscha"liche Wahrheit. Braunschweig: Vieweg, 1988.
            — — — . Reality  and  Scientiﬁc  Truth:  Discussions  with  Einstein,  von  Laue,  and 
                Planck. Edited by Thomas Braun. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 
                1980.
            Rovelli, Carlo. Helgoland: Making Sense of the Quantum Revolution. Translated 
                by Erica Segre and Simon Carnell. New York: Riverhead, 2021.
            Rubenstein,  Richard  E. When  Jesus  Became  God:  The  Epic  Fight  over  Christ’s 
                Divinity in the Last Days of Rome. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1999.
            Russell, Bertrand. The Problems of Philosophy. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
                Press, 1998.
            Schilpp, Paul Arthur. Kant’s Pre- critical Ethics. 2nd ed. Evanston, Ill.: Northwest-
                ern University Press, 1960.
            Schlosser, Johann Georg. Kleine Schri"en. Basel: Serini, 1779– 93.
            Schrödinger,  Erwin. “Die  gegenwärtige  Situation  in  der  Quantenmechanik.” 
                Naturwissenscha"en 23, no. 48 (1935): 807– 12.
            — — — . “Die gegenwärtige Situation in der Quantenmechanik.” Naturwissen-


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   310                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                      Bibliography                        311

                scha"en 23, no. 49 (1935): 823– 49.
            — — — . “An Undulatory Theory of the Mechanics of Atoms and Molecules.” 
                Physical Review, 2nd ser., 28, no. 6 (1926): 1049– 70.
            Scott,  William  Taussig. Erwin  Schrödinger:  An  Introduction  to  His  Writings. 
                Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1967.
            Slavitt, David R., trans. The Consolation of Philosophy, by Anicius Manlius Sev-
                erinus Boethius. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2008.
            Slavuski, Victoria. “The Old Man and the City; Chronicle of a Change of Heart: 
                Borges’s Late Love A7air with the People.” Times Literary Supplement, Aug. 
                20, 1999, 10– 12.
            Sommerfeld,  Arnold,  ed. The  Principle  of  Relativity:  A  Collection  of  Original 
                Memoirs on the Special and General Theory of Relativity. Translated by Wil-
                fried Perrett and G. B. Je7ery. New York: Dover, 1952.
            — — — . Das Relativitätsprinzip: Eine Sammlung von Abhandlungen. 5th ed. Wies-
                baden: Springer, 1923.
            Strawson, Galen. “Your Move: The Maze of Free Will.” Opinionator (blog), New 
                York Times, July 22, 2010. opinionator .blogs .nytimes .com.
            Swedenborg, Emanuel. De caelo et ejus mirabilibus et de inferno: Ex auditis et 
                visis. Edited by Samuel Howard Worcester. 2nd ed. New York: American 
                Swedenborg Printing and Publishing, 1890.
            — — — . Heaven  and  Hell;  Also, The  World of  Spirits  or  Intermediate  State  from 
                Things Heard and Seen. Translated by John Faulkner Potts. Rotch ed. Bos-
                ton: Swedenborg Printing Bureau, 1907.
            Teitelboim, Volodia. Los dos Borges: Vida, sueños, enigmas. Mexico City: Hermes, 
                1996.
            Unamuno,  Miguel  de. Obras  completas.  Edited  by  Ricardo  Senabre.  Madrid: 
                Turner, 1995– 2009.
            — — — . Tragic Sense of Life. Translated by Anthony Kerrigan. Princeton, N.J.: 
                Princeton University Press, 1972.
            United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. “What We Believe.” www .usccb 
                .org.
            Vaihinger,  Hans.  “Briefe  aus  dem  Kantkreis.” Altpreussische  Monatsschri"  17 
                (1880): 286– 99.
            Van der Waerden, Bartel Leendert, ed. Sources of Quantum Mechanics. Amster-
                dam: North- Holland, 1967.
            Verfassung des Deutschen Reiches vom 11. August 1919. 2nd ed. Berlin: Carl Hey-
                mann, 1920.
            Voltaire. Candide;  or,  Optimism.  Translated  by  Burton  Ra7el.  New  Haven, 
                Conn.: Yale University Press, 2005.
            Warda, Arthur. “Ergänzungen zu E. Fromm’s zweitem und drittem Beitrage zur 
                Lebensgeschichte Kants. I.” Altpreussische Monatsschri" 38 (1901): 75– 95.
            — — — ,  ed. Briefe  an  und  von  Johann  George  Sche!ner.  Munich:  Duncker  & 
                Humblot, 1916– 38.
            Wasianski,  Ehregott  Andreas  Christoph,  ed. Immanuel  Kant  in  seinen  letzten 


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   311                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            312                       Bibliography 

                Lebensjahren: Ein Beytrag zur Kenntniss seines Characters und häuslichen Leb-
                ens aus dem täglichen Umgauge mit ihm. Königsberg: Friedrich Nicolovius, 
                1804.
            Wegenstein, Bernadette, dir. The Conductor. Waystone, 2021.
            Weinberg, Steven. Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamental Laws 
                of Nature. London: Hutchinson Radius, 1993.
            Williamson, Edwin. Borges: A Life. New York: Penguin, 2004.
            — — — . “Borges in Context: The Autobiographical Dimension.” In Cambridge 
                Companion to Jorge Luis Borges, edited by Edwin Williamson, 201–25.  Cam-
                bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
            Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Tractatus Logico- Philosophicus. Translated by Charles Kay 
                Ogden. 2nd ed. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1933.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   312                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only


                            FURTHER READING


            Abiko, Seiya. “Einstein’s Kyoto Address: ‘How I Created the Theory of Relativ-
                ity.’ ” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences 31, no. 1 (2000): 
                1– 35.
            Bitbol, Michel. Schrödinger’s Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics. Dordrecht: Klu-
                wer, 1996.
            Borges, Jorge Luis. Discusión. Buenos Aires: Gleizer, 1932.
            — — — . “The Translators of The Thousand and One Nights.” Translated by Esther 
                Allen.  In Selected  Non- ﬁctions,  ed.  Eliot  Weinberger,  92– 109.  New  York: 
                Penguin, 1999.
            Borges, Jorge Luis, and Roberto Alifano. Conversaciones. Madrid: Debate, 1986.
            Campbell, Joseph. The Ecstasy of Being: Mythology and Dance. Edited by Nancy 
                Allison. Novato: New World, 2017.
            — — — . The Masks of God. New York: Penguin, 1968.
            Canales,  Jimena. The  Physicist  and  the  Philosopher:  Einstein,  Bergson,  and  the 
                Debate That Changed Our Understanding of Time. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
                University Press, 2015.
            — — — . A Tenth of a Second: A History. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
                2009.
            Carson, Cathryn. Heisenberg  in  the  Atomic  Age:  Science  and  the  Public  Sphere. 
                Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2010.
            Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. Translated by Alan Bass. Chicago: Uni-
                versity of Chicago Press, 1982.
            D’Hoine,  Pieter,  and  Marije  Martijn,  eds. All  from  One:  A  Guide  to  Proclus. 
                Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
            Dillon,  John,  and  Lloyd  P.  Gerson,  eds. Neoplatonic  Philosophy:  Introductory 
                Readings. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2004.
            Egginton,  William. The  Philosopher’s  Desire:  Psychoanalysis,  Interpretation,  and 
                Truth. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2007.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   313                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

            314                 F URTHER READING 

            Gleick, James. Genius: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman. New York: Vin-
                tage, 1992.
            — — — . Time Travel: A History. New York: Pantheon, 2016.
            Gleiser, Marcelo. The Prophet and the Astronomer: A Scientiﬁc Journey to the End 
                of Time. New York: Norton, 2001.
            Greene, Brian. The Hidden Reality: Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of the 
                Cosmos. New York: Vintage, 2011.
            Gumbrecht, Hans Ulrich, ed. What Is Life? The Intellectual Pertinence of Erwin 
                Schrödinger. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2011.
            Hägglund, Martin. This Life: Secular Faith and Spiritual Freedom. New York: Pan-
                theon, 2019.
            Heelan, Patrick A. Quantum Mechanics and Objectivity: A Study of the Physical 
                Philosophy of Werner Heisenberg. The Hague: Martinus Nijho7, 1965.
            Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time: A Translation of “Sein und Zeit.” Translated 
                by Joan Stambaugh. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1996.
            — — — . Kant and the Problem of Metaphysics. Translated by Richard Ta.. 5th ed. 
                Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
            Holt, Jim. Why Does the World Exist? New York: Liveright, 2012.
            Huggett, Nick, ed. Space from Zeno to Einstein: Classic Readings with a Contem-
                porary Commentary. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999.
            Jammer, Max. The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics. 2nd ed. New 
                York: American Institute of Physics, 1989.
            Janiak, Andrew. “Newton’s Philosophy.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
                phy, edited by Edward N. Zalta. plato .stanford .edu.
            Jaspers, Karl. Drei Gründer des Philosophierens: Plato, Augustin, Kant. Munich: 
                Piper, 1967.
            Johnson, David E. Kant’s Dog: On Borges, Philosophy, and the Time of Translation. 
                Albany: State University of New York Press, 2013.
            Lloyd, Seth. Programming the Universe: A Quantum Computer Scientist Takes On 
                the Cosmos. New York: Knopf, 2006.
            Marcus, Russell, and Mark McEvoy, eds. An Historical Introduction to the Philoso-
                phy of Mathematics: A Reader. London: Bloomsbury, 2016.
            Moore, Walter. Schrödinger: Life and Thought. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Uni-
                versity Press, 1989.
            Nussbaum, Martha C. The Fragility of Goodness: Luck and Ethics in Greek Tragedy 
                and Philosophy. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
            Rees, Martin. Just Six Numbers: The Deep Forces That Shape the Universe. New 
                York: Basic Books, 2000.
            Rigden,  John  S. Einstein  1905:  The  Standard  of  Greatness.  Cambridge,  Mass.: 
                Harvard University Press, 2005.
            Schilpp, Paul Arthur. Albert Einstein: Philosopher- Scientist. New York: MJF, 1969.
            Schopenhauer, Arthur. The World as Will and Idea. Translated by Richard Bur-
                don Haldane and John Kemp. 3rd ed. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trüb-
                ner, 1896.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   314                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                  for reference only

                                     Further Reading                      315

            Schrödinger, Erwin. Nature and the Greeks; and, Science and Humanism. Cam-
                bridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
            — — — . What Is Life? The Physical Aspect of the Living Cell; with Mind and Mat-
                ter; and Autobiographical Sketches. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University 
                Press, 1992.
            Smith, Norman Kemp, trans. Critique of Pure Reason, by Immanuel Kant. 2nd 
                ed. New York: St. Martin’s, 1965.
            Strobach, Nico. The Moment of Change: A Systematic History in the Philosophy of 
                Space and Time. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1998.
            Wheeler, John Archibald, and Wojciech Hubert Zurek, eds. Quantum Theory 
                and Measurement. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1983.


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   315                                         2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   316                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


                                                                              INDEX


                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   317                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       318                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   318                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           319

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   319                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       320                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   320                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           321

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   321                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       322                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   322                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           323

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   323                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       324                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   324                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           325

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   325                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       326                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   326                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           327

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   327                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       328                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   328                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           329

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   329                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       330                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   330                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                                                                                   Index                                                           331

                        16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   331                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only

                       332                                                        Index 

                       16 pages TK


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   332                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                        "  # '$& "('0$   $%&   "0$%'-

                William Egginton is the Decker Professor in the Humani-
                ties and director of the Alexander Grass Humanities Insti-
                tute  of  the  Johns  Hopkins  University.  He  is  the  author 
                of  multiple  books  including How  the  World  Became  a 
                Stage (2003), Perversity and Ethics (2006), A Wrinkle in His-
                tory (2006), The Philosopher’s Desire (2007), The Theater of 
                Truth (2010), In Defense of Religious Moderation (2011), The 
                Man  Who  Invented  Fiction  (2016), and The  Splintering  of 
                the American Mind (2018), and co- author with David Cas-
                tillo of Medialogies (2017) and What Would Cervantes Do? 
                (2022).


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   333                                2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   334                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                              for reference only


                            "  # '$& '#  $%&  $ &E$

                This  book  was  set  in  Sabon,  a  typeface  designed  by 
                the  well- known  German  typographer  Jan  Tschichold 
                (1902– 74).  Sabon’s  design  is  based  upon  the  original 
                letter  forms  of  sixteenth- century French  type  designer 
                Claude Garamond and was created speciﬁcally to be used 
                for  three  sources:  foundry  type  for  hand  composition, 
                Linotype, and Monotype. Tschichold named his typeface 
                for the famous Frankfurt typefounder Jacques Sabon (c. 
                1520– 80).

                        Typeset by Scribe, Inc., Philadelphia, PA

                               Printed and bound by

                            Designed by Jo Anne Metsch


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   335                                2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   336                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   337                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   338                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   339                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   340                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   341                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
                                                                   for reference only


Eggi_9780593316306_all_1p_r1.indd   342                                                                                                                        2/10/2023   11:37
